The SQL language has several parts: 

- **Data-definition language** (**DDL**). The SQL DDL provides commands for defining relation schemas, deleting relations, and modifying relation schemas.
- **Data-manipulation language** (**DML**). The SQL DML provides the ability to query information from the database and to insert tuples into, delete tuples from, and modify tuples in the database.
- **Integrity**. The SQL DDL includes commands for specifying integrity constraints that the data stored in the database must satisfy. Updates that violate integrity constraints are disallowed.
- **View definition**. The SQL DDL includes commands for defining views.
- **Transaction control**. SQL includes commands for specifying the beginning and end points of transactions.
- **Embedded SQL** and **dynamic SQL**. Embedded and dynamic SQL define how SQL statements can be embedded within general-purpose programming languages, such as C, C++, and Java.
- **Authorization**. The SQL DDL includes commands for specifying access rights to relations and views.

The SQL standard supports a variety of built-in types, including: 

- **char**(n): A fixed-length character string with user-specified length n. The full form, **character**, can be used instead.
- **varchar**(n): A variable-length character string with user-specified maximum length n. The full form, **character varying**, is equivalent.
- **int**: An integer (a finite subset of the integers that is machine dependent). The full form, **integer**, is equivalent.
- **smallint**: A small integer (a machine-dependent subset of the integer type).
- **numeric**(p, d): A fixed-point number with user-specified precision. The number consists of p digits (plus a sign), and d of the p digits are to the right of the decimal point. Thus, numeric(3,1) allows 44.5 to be stored exactly, but neither 444.5 nor 0.32 can be stored exactly in a field of this type.
- **real**, double precision: Floating-point and double-precision floating-point numbers with machine-dependent precision.
- **float**(n): A floating-point number with precision of at least n digits.

The **char** data type stores fixed-length strings. Consider, for example, an attribute A of type **char**(10). If we stored a string “Avi” in this attribute, seven spaces are appended to the string to make it 10 characters long. In contrast, if attribute B were of type **varchar**(10), and we stored “Avi” in attribute B, no spaces would be added. When comparing two values of type char, if they are of different lengths, extra spaces are automatically attached to the shorter one to make them the same size before comparison.

When comparing a **char** type with a **varchar** type, one may expect extra spaces to be added to the varchar type to make the lengths equal, before comparison; however, this may or may not be done, depending on the database system. As a result, even if the same value “Avi” is stored in the attributes A and B above, a comparison A=B may return false. We recommend you always use the **varchar** type instead of the **char** type to avoid these problems.

SQL also provides the **nvarchar** type to store multilingual data using the Unicode representation. However, many databases allow Unicode (in the UTF-8 representation) to be stored even in **varchar** types.

To remove a relation from an SQL database, we use the **drop table** command. The drop table command deletes all information about the dropped relation from the database. The command `drop table r;` is a more drastic action than `delete from r;`. The latter retains relation r, but deletes all tuples in r. The former deletes not only all tuples of r, but also the schema for r. After r is dropped, no tuples can be inserted into r unless it is re-created with the create table command.

We use the **alter table** command to add attributes to an existing relation. All tuples in the relation are assigned null as the value for the new attribute. The form of the alter table command is `alter table r add A D;` where r is the name of an existing relation, A is the name of the attribute to be added, and D is the type of the added attribute.  We can drop attributes from a relation by the command `alter table r drop A;` where r is the name of an existing relation, and A is the name of an attribute of the relation. Many database systems do not support dropping of attributes, although they will allow an entire table to be dropped.

In the formal, mathematical definition of the relational model, a relation is a **set**. Thus, duplicate tuples would never appear in relations. In practice, duplicate elimination is time-consuming. Therefore, SQL allows duplicates in database relations as well as in the results of SQL expressions. In those cases where we want to force the elimination of duplicates, we insert the keyword `distinct` after `select`:

```sql
select distinct dept_name 
from instructor;
```

SQL allows us to use the keyword `all` to specify explicitly that duplicates are not removed:

```sql
select all dept_name 
from instructor;
```

Since duplicate retention is the default, we shall not use `all` in our examples. To ensure the elimination of duplicates in the results of our example queries, we shall use `distinct` whenever it is necessary.

A typical SQL query has the form: 

```sql
select A1, A2, … , An 
from r1, r2, … , rm 
where P;
```

Although the clauses must be written in the order **select**, **from**, **where**, the easiest way to understand the operations specified by the query is to consider the clauses in operational order: first **from**, then **where**, and then **select**.

The **from** clause by itself defines a **Cartesian product** of the relations listed in the clause. It is defined formally in terms of relational algebra, but it can also be understood as an **iterative process** that generates tuples for the result relation of the **from** clause.

```
for each tuple t1 in relation r1 
	for each tuple t2 in relation r2 
		...
		for each tuple tm in relation rm 
			Concatenate t1, t2, … , tm into a single tuple t 
			Add t into the result relation
```

Another reason to rename a relation is a case where we wish to compare tuples in the same relation. We then need to take the Cartesian product of a relation with itself and, without renaming, it becomes impossible to distinguish one tuple from the other. Suppose that we want to write the query “Find the names of all instructors whose salary is greater than at least one instructor in the Biology department.” We can write the SQL expression:

```sql
select distinct T.name 
from instructor as T, instructor as S   -- without 'as' also correct
where T.salary > S.salary and S.dept_name = 'Biology';
```

An identifier, such as T and S, that is used to rename a relation is referred to as a **correlation name** in the SQL standard, but it is also commonly referred to as a **table alias**, or a **correlation variable**, or a **tuple variable**.

SQL specifies **strings** by enclosing them in **single quotes**, for example, 'Computer'. A single quote character that is part of a string can be specified by using **two single quote** characters; for example, the string “It’s right” can be specified by `'It''s right'`.

The SQL standard specifies that the equality operation on strings is **case sensitive**; as a result, the expression “`'comp.sci.' = 'Comp.Sci.'`” evaluates to false. However, some database systems, such as MySQL and SQL Server, do not distinguish uppercase from lowercase when matching strings; as a result, “`'comp.sci.' = 'Comp.Sci.'`” would evaluate to true on these systems. This default behavior can, however, be changed, either at the database level or at the level of specific attributes.

SQL also permits a variety of functions on character strings, such as concatenating (using “`||`”), extracting substrings, finding the length of strings, converting strings to uppercase (using the function `upper(s)` where s is a string) and lowercase (using the function `lower(s)`), removing spaces at the end of the string (using `trim(s)`), and so on. 

Pattern matching can be performed on strings using the operator `like`. We describe patterns by using two special characters: 

- Percent (`%`): The `%` character matches any **substring**.
- Underscore (`_`): The character matches any **character**.

Patterns are **case sensitive** (Except for MySQL, or with the `ilike` operator in PostgreSQL, where patterns are case insensitive.); that is, uppercase characters do not match lowercase characters, or vice versa. To illustrate pattern matching, we consider the following examples: 

-  `'Intro%'` matches any string beginning with “Intro”. 
- `'%Comp%'` matches any string containing “Comp” as a substring, for example, 'Intro. to Computer Science', and 'Computational Biology'.
- `'___'` matches any string of exactly three characters.
- `'___%'` matches any string of at least three characters.

SQL includes a `between` comparison operator to simplify `where` clauses that specify that a value be less than or equal to some value and greater than or equal to some other value. If we wish to find the names of instructors with salary amounts between \$90,000 and \$100,000, we can use the `between` comparison to write:

```sql
select name 
from instructor 
where salary between 90000 and 100000;
```

instead of:

```sql
select name 
from instructor 
where salary >= 90000 and salary <= 100000;
```

Similarly, we can use the `not between` comparison operator.

SQL permits us to use the notation (v1, v2, ..., vn) to denote a tuple of arity n containing values v1, v2, ..., vn; the notation is called a **row constructor**. The comparison operators can be used on tuples, and the ordering is defined lexicographically. For example, `(a1, a2) <= (b1, b2)` is true if `a1 <= b1 and a2 <= b2`; similarly, the two tuples are equal if all their attributes are equal. Thus, the SQL query:

```sql
select name, course_id 
from instructor, teaches 
where instructor.ID = teaches.ID and dept_name = 'Biology';
```

can be rewritten as follows:

```sql
select name, course_id 
from instructor, teaches 
where (instructor.ID, dept_name) = (teaches.ID, 'Biology');
```

To find the set of all courses taught either in Fall 2017 or in Spring 2018, or both, we can use the **union operation** to write the following query.

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 union 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

The `union` operation automatically eliminates duplicates, unlike the `select` clause.

If we want to retain all duplicates, we must write `union all` in place of `union`:

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 union all 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

To find the set of all courses taught in both the Fall 2017 and Spring 2018, we can use the **intersect operation**:

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 intersect 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

The `intersect` operation automatically eliminates duplicates.

If we want to retain all duplicates, we must write `intersect all` in place of `intersect`:

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 intersect all 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

The number of duplicate tuples that appear in the result is equal to the minimum number of duplicates in both `c1` and `c2`. For example, if four sections of ECE-101 were taught in the Fall 2017 semester and two sections of ECE-101 were taught in the Spring 2018 semester, then there would be two tuples with ECE-101 in the result.

To find all courses taught in the Fall 2017 semester but not in the Spring 2018 semester, we can use the **except operation**:

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 except 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

The `except` operation outputs all tuples from its first input that do not occur in the second input; that is, it performs **set difference**. The operation automatically eliminates duplicates in the inputs before performing set difference. For example, if four sections of ECE-101 were taught in the Fall 2017 semester and two sections of ECE-101 were taught in the Spring 2018 semester, the result of the `except` operation would not have any copy of ECE-101.

If we want to retain duplicates, we must write `except all` in place of `except`:

```sql
(select course_id 
 from section 
 where semester = 'Fall' and year= 2017) 
 except all 
 (select course_id 
  from section 
  where semester = 'Spring' and year= 2018);
```

The number of duplicate copies of a tuple in the result is equal to the number of duplicate copies in `c1` minus the number of duplicate copies in `c2`, provided that the difference is positive. Thus, if four sections of ECE-101 were taught in the Fall 2017 semester and two sections of ECE-101 were taught in Spring 2018, then there are two tuples with ECE-101 in the result. If, however, there were two or fewer sections of ECE-101 in the Fall 2017 semester and two sections of ECE-101 in the Spring 2018 semester, there is no tuple with ECE-101 in the result.

##### Null Values

Null values present special problems in relational operations, including arithmetic operations, comparison operations, and set operations.

The result of an arithmetic expression is null if any of the input values is null. For example, if a query has an expression `r.A + 5`, and `r.A` is `null` for a particular tuple, then the expression result must also be `null` for that tuple.

SQL treats as **unknown** the result of any comparison involving a `null` value.

This creates a third logical value in addition to true and false.

- **and**: The result of true and unknown is unknown, false and unknown is false, while unknown and unknown is unknown.
- **or**: The result of true or unknown is true, false or unknown is unknown, while unknown or unknown is unknown.
- **not**: The result of not unknown is unknown.

You can verify that if r.A is null, then “1 < r.A” as well as “not (1 < r.A)” evaluate to unknown.

If the where clause predicate evaluates to either false or unknown for a tuple, that tuple is not added to the result.

SQL uses the special keyword `null` in a predicate to test for a null value. Thus, to find all instructors who appear in the instructor relation with null values for salary, we write:

```sql
select name 
from instructor 
where salary is null;
```

SQL allows us to test whether the result of a comparison is unknown:

```sql
select name 
from instructor 
where salary > 10000 is unknown;
```

When a query uses the `select distinct` clause, duplicate tuples must be eliminated. For this purpose, when comparing values of corresponding attributes from two tuples, the values are treated as identical if either both are non-null and equal in value, or both are null. Thus, two copies of a tuple, such as `{('A',null), ('A',null)}`, are treated as being identical, even if some of the attributes have a null value. Using the distinct clause then retains only one copy of such identical tuples. Note that the treatment of null above is different from the way nulls are treated in predicates, where a comparison “`null=null`” would return `unknown`, rather than true.

The approach of treating tuples as identical if they have the same values for all attributes, even if some of the values are null, is also used for the set operations union, intersection, and except.

##### Aggregate Functions

Aggregate functions are functions that take a collection (a set or multiset) of values as input and return a single value. SQL offers five standard built-in aggregate functions:

- Average: `avg` 
- Minimum: `min`
- Maximum: `max` 
- Total: `sum` 
- Count: `count` 

The input to `sum` and `avg` must be a collection of numbers, but the other operators can operate on collections of nonnumeric data types, such as strings, as well.

There are cases where we must eliminate duplicates before computing an aggregate function. If we do want to eliminate duplicates, we use the keyword `distinct` in the aggregate expression. An example arises in the query “Find the total number of instructors who teach a course in the Spring 2018 semester.” In this case, an instructor counts only once, regardless of the number of course sections that the instructor teaches. The required information is contained in the relation teaches, and we write this query as follows:

```sql
select count (distinct ID) 
from teaches 
where semester = 'Spring' and year = 2018;
```

Because of the keyword distinct preceding ID, even if an instructor teaches more than one course, she is counted only once in the result.

SQL does not allow the use of `distinct` with `count (*)`. It is legal to use `distinct` with `max` and `min`, even though the result does not change. We can use the keyword `all` in place of `distinct` to specify duplicate retention, but since `all` is the default, there is no need to do so.

There are circumstances where we would like to apply the aggregate function not only to a single set of tuples, but also to a group of sets of tuples; we specify this in SQL using the **group by** clause. The attribute or attributes given in the `group by` clause are used to form groups. Tuples with the same value on all attributes in the `group by` clause are placed in one group.

When an SQL query uses grouping, it is important to ensure that the only attributes that appear in the `select` statement without being aggregated are those that are present in the `group by` clause. In other words, any attribute that is not present in the `group by` clause may appear in the `select` clause only as an argument to an aggregate function, otherwise the query is treated as erroneous. For example, the following query is erroneous since ID does not appear in the `group by` clause, and yet it appears in the `select` clause without being aggregated:

```sql
/* erroneous query */ 
select dept_name, ID, avg (salary) 
from instructor 
group by dept_name;

-- ERROR:  column "instructor.id" must appear in the GROUP BY clause or be used in an aggregate function
```

In the preceding query, each instructor in a particular group (defined by dept_name) can have a different ID, and since only one tuple is output for each group, there is no unique way of choosing which ID value to output. As a result, such cases are disallowed by SQL.

At times, it is useful to state a condition that applies to groups rather than to tuples. For example, we might be interested in only those departments where the average salary of the instructors is more than $42,000. This condition does not apply to a single tuple; rather, it applies to each group constructed by the group by clause. To express such a query, we use the **having** clause of SQL. SQL applies predicates in the having clause after groups have been formed, so aggregate functions may be used in the having clause:

```sql
select dept_name, avg (salary) as avg_salary 
from instructor 
group by dept_name 
having avg (salary) > 42000;
```

As was the case for the `select` clause, any attribute that is present in the `having` clause without being aggregated must appear in the `group by` clause, otherwise the query is erroneous.

The meaning of a query containing aggregation, `group by`, or `having` clauses is defined by the following sequence of operations:

1. As was the case for queries without aggregation, the `from` clause is first evaluated to get a relation.
2. If a `where` clause is present, the predicate in the `where` clause is applied on the result relation of the `from` clause.
3. Tuples satisfying the `where` predicate are then placed into groups by the `group by` clause if it is present. If the `group by` clause is absent, the entire set of tuples satisfying the `where` predicate is treated as being in one group.
4. The `having` clause, if it is present, is applied to each group; the groups that do not satisfy the `having` clause predicate are removed.
5. The `select` clause uses the remaining groups to generate tuples of the result of the query, applying the aggregate functions to get a single result tuple for each group.

##### Nested Subqueries















