Modules allow you to divide the codebase into small units that can be developed and tested independently. Modules are also the main mechanism to enforce information hiding by keeping private all the functions and variables that are not explicitly marked to be exported.

One of the bigger problems with JavaScript in the browser is the lack of namespacing. Every script runs in the global scope; therefore, internal application code or third-party dependencies can pollute the scope while exposing their own pieces of functionality. This can be extremely harmful. A popular technique to solve this class of problems is called the **revealing module pattern**, and it looks like this:

```js
const myModule = (() => {   
  const privateFoo = () => {}   
  const privateBar = []  
  
  const exported = {     
    publicFoo: () => {},     
    publicBar: () => {}   
  }   
  
  return exported 
})() // once the parenthesis here are parsed, the function will be invoked 

console.log(myModule) // { publicFoo: [Function: publicFoo], publicBar: [Function: publicBar] }
console.log(myModule.privateFoo, myModule.privateBar) // undefined undefined
```

This pattern leverages a self-invoking function. This type of function is sometimes also referred to as **Immediately Invoked Function Expression (IIFE)** and it is used to create a private scope, exporting only the parts that are meant to be public. In the preceding code, the myModule variable contains only the exported API, while the rest of the module content is practically inaccessible from outside. The idea behind this pattern is used as a base for the CommonJS module system.

The most important differentiator between ESM and CommonJS is that ES modules are static, which means that imports are described at the top level of every module and outside any control flow statement. Also, the name of the imported modules cannot be dynamically generated at runtime using expressions, only constant strings are allowed. Static imports allow the static analysis of the dependency tree, which allows optimizations such as dead code elimination (tree shaking) and more.

There are several ways to tell the Node.js interpreter to consider a given module as an ES module rather than a CommonJS module: 

- Give the module file the extension *.mjs* 
- Add to the nearest parent package.json a field called "type" with a value of "module"

It's very important to note that, as opposed to CommonJS, with ESM we have to specify the file extension of the imported modules. With CommonJS we can use either ./logger or ./logger.js, with ESM we are forced to use ./logger.js.

Async imports can be performed at runtime using the special import() operator. The import() operator is syntactically equivalent to a function that takes a module identifier as an argument and it returns a promise that resolves to a module object.

The goal of the interpreter is to build a graph of all the necessary modules (a dependency graph). Essentially, the dependency graph is needed by the interpreter to figure out how modules depend on each other and in what order the code needs to be executed. When the node interpreter is launched, it gets passed some code to execute, generally in the form of a JavaScript file. This file is the starting point for the dependency resolution, and it is called the entry point. From the entry point, the interpreter will find and follow all the import statements recursively in a depth-first fashion, until all the necessary code is explored and then evaluated.

More specifically, this process happens in three separate phases: 

- Phase 1 - Construction (or parsing): Find all the imports and recursively load the content of every module from the respective file.
- Phase 2 - Instantiation: For every exported entity, keep a named reference in memory, but don't assign any value just yet. Also, references are created for all the import and export statements tracking the dependency relationship between them (linking). No JavaScript code has been executed at this stage.
- Phase 3 - Evaluation: Node.js finally executes the code so that all the previously instantiated entities can get an actual value. Now running the code from the entry point is possible because all the blanks have been filled.

In simple terms, we could say that Phase 1 is about finding all the dots, Phase 2 connects those creating paths, and, finally, Phase 3 walks through the paths in the right order.

At first glance, this approach doesn't seem very different from what CommonJS does, but there's a fundamental difference. Due to its dynamic nature, CommonJS will execute all the files while the dependency graph is explored. We have seen that every time a new require statement is found, all the previous code has already been executed. This is why you can use require even within if statements or loops, and construct module identifiers from variables.

In ESM, these three phases are totally separate from each other, no code can be executed until the dependency graph has been fully built, and therefore module imports and exports have to be static.

### Read-only live bindings

Another fundamental characteristic of ES modules, which helps with cyclic dependencies, is the idea that imported modules are effectively read-only live bindings to their exported values:

```js
// counter.js
export let count = 0
export function increment () {
  count++
}
```

```js
// main.js
import { count, increment } from './counter.js'

console.log(count) // prints 0
increment()
console.log(count) // prints 1
count++ // TypeError: Assignment to constant variable!

```

What we can see in this code is that we can read the value of count at any time and change it using the increment() function, but as soon as we try to mutate the count variable directly, we get an error as if we were trying to mutate a const binding.

This proves that when an entity is imported in the scope, the binding to its original value cannot be changed (read-only binding) unless the bound value changes within the scope of the original module itself (live binding), which is outside the direct control of the consumer code.

This approach is fundamentally different from CommonJS. In fact, in CommonJS, the entire exports object is copied (shallow copy) when required from a module. This means that, if the value of primitive variables like numbers or string is changed at a later time, the requiring module won't be able to see those changes.

### ESM and CommonJS differences and interoperability

ES modules run implicitly in strict mode. This means that we don't have to explicitly add the "use strict" statements at the beginning of every file. Strict mode cannot be disabled.

In ESM, some important CommonJS references are not defined. These include require, exports, module.exports, \_\_filename, and \_\_dirname. If we try to use any of them within an ES module, since it also runs in strict mode, we will get a ReferenceError:

```js
console.log(exports) // ReferenceError: exports is not defined
console.log(module) // ReferenceError: module is not defined
console.log(__filename) // ReferenceError: __filename is not defined
console.log(__dirname) // ReferenceError: __dirname is not defined
```

In ESM, it is possible to get a reference to the current file URL by using the special object import.meta. Specifically, import.meta.url is a reference to the current module file in a format similar to file:///path/to/current_module.js. This value can be used to reconstruct \_\_filename and \_\_dirname in the form of absolute paths:

```js
import { fileURLToPath } from 'url'
import { dirname } from 'path'

const __filename = fileURLToPath(import.meta.url)
const __dirname = dirname(__filename)

// Node.js now support import.meta.dirname and import.meta.filename, both added in v20
```

It is also possible to recreate the require() function as follows:

```js
import { createRequire } from 'module'
const require = createRequire(import.meta.url)
```

In the global scope of an ES module, this is undefined, while in CommonJS, this is a reference to exports:

```js
// this.js - ESM 
console.log(this) // undefined
```

```js
// this.cjs – CommonJS 
console.log(this === exports) // true
```

ESM cannot import JSON files directly as modules, a feature that is used quite frequently with CommonJS. The following import statement will fail:

```js
import data from './data.json' // TypeError (Unknown file extension: .json)
```

To overcome this limitation, we can use again the module.createRequire utility:

```js
import { createRequire } from 'module'

const require = createRequire(import.meta.url)
const data = require('./data.json')

console.log(data)
```







