Modern browsers heavily restrict JavaScript with the **browser security model**. This dictates that JavaScript code must be executed within a sandbox, where it’s not permitted to perform any of the following actions: 

- Start new processes or access other existing processes. 
- Read arbitrary chunks of system memory. As a managed memory language, JavaScript can’t read memory outside its sandbox.
- Access the local disk. Modern browsers allow websites to store small amounts of data locally, but this storage is abstracted from the filesystem itself. 
- Access the operating system’s network layer. 
- Call operating system functions.

JavaScript executing in the browser sandbox is permitted to do the following actions:

- Read and manipulate the DOM of the current web page. 
- Listen to and respond to user actions on the current page by registering event listeners.
- Make HTTP calls on behalf of the user.
- Open new web pages or refresh the URL of the current page, but only in response to a user action. 
- Write new entries to the browser history and go backward and forward in history.
- Ask for the user’s location.
- Ask permission to send desktop notifications.

Browsers connect with the operating system to resolve and cache DNS addresses, interpret and verify security certificates, encode requests in HTTPS if needed, and store and transmit cookies according to the web server’s instructions. To understand how these responsibilities fit together, let’s take a behind-the-scenes look at a user logging into Amazon: 

1. The user visits www.amazon.com in their favorite browser.

2. The browser attempts to resolve the domain (amazon.com) to an IP address. First, the browser consults the operating system’s DNS cache. If it finds no results, it asks the **internet service provider** to look in the provider’s DNS cache. In the unlikely event that nobody on the ISP has visited the Amazon website before, the ISP will resolve the domain at an **authoritative DNS server**.

3. Now that it has resolved the IP address, the browser attempts to initiate a TCP handshake with the server corresponding to the IP address in order to establish a secure connection. 

4. Once the TCP session has been established, the browser constructs an HTTP GET request to www.amazon.com. TCP splits the HTTP request into packets and sends them to the server to be reassembled. 

5. At this point, the HTTP conversation upgrades to HTTPS to ensure secure communication. The browser and server undertake a TLS handshake, agree on an encryption cypher, and exchange encryption keys. 

6. The server uses the secure channel to send back an HTTP response containing HTML of the Amazon front page. The browser parses and displays the page, typically triggering many other HTTP GET requests.

7. The user navigates to the login page, enters their login credentials, and submits the login form, which generates a POST request to the server.

8. The server validates the login credentials and establishes a session by returning a Set-Cookie header in the response. The browser stores the cookie for the prescribed time, and sends it back with subsequent requests to Amazon.











