This chapter focuses on how you should be writing secure code, by adhering to the **Software Development Life Cycle** (**SDLC**), a fancy phrase for the process a development team follows when designing new website features, writing code, testing it, and pushing out changes.

##### Phase 1: Design and Analysis

The **SDLC** doesn’t begin with writing code; it begins with thinking about what code you should be writing. We call this first phase the design and analysis phase: you analyze the features you need to add and design their implementation.

##### Phase 2: Writing Code

Using git as source control (also known as version control).

##### Phase 3: Pre-Release Testing

When you run a unit test, it calls functions in your main codebase. When you run all your unit tests, the percentage of your codebase that they execute is called your coverage. 

Here’s a good rule of thumb: when you discover a bug, write a unit test asserting the correct behavior, and then fix the bug. This prevents the issue from reoccurring.

Once you’ve completed all code changes for a release, you should deploy them to a test environment for final testing. A test environment (often called a staging, pre-production, or quality assurance environment) should be a fully operational copy of the website, run on dedicated servers. A test environment is essential for detecting software defects such as security vulnerabilities before a release happens. Large development teams often employ quality assurance (QA) staff dedicated to testing software in such environments. If you’re integrating different sets of code changes together, this is sometimes called integration testing.

Test environments usually have their own database, which requires realistic-looking test data in order to allow thorough testing of the site’s functionality. A common approach to generating good test data is copying over data from production systems. If you do this, take special care to scrub this kind of data-copy of sensitive information, including names, payment details, and passwords. Numerous high-profile data leaks in recent years have been caused by attackers stumbling across improperly scrubbed data in a test environment.

##### Phase 4: The Release Process

Whatever your approach, your release process needs to be reliable, reproducible, and revertible.

A reliable release process means that you can guarantee what code, dependencies, resources, and configuration files get deployed during the release. If your release process is unreliable, you may not be running the version of the code you think you’re running, which is a serious security risk. To ensure that your website deploys files reliably, release scripts typically use checksums—digital “fingerprints” that ensure that the files copied onto the server are identical to those held in source control.

A reproducible release process is one that you can rerun with the same results, in different environments, or with different versions of the code. Reproducibility means less room for manual error during a release. If your release process requires an administrator to perfectly perform 24 steps in the correct order, you can expect them to make mistakes. Write scripts and automate your release process as much as possible! A reproducible process is also essential for setting up good test environments.

A revertible release process allows you to roll back releases. Sometimes unexpected contingencies make you want to “undo” a recent release and revert to a prior version of the code. This process should be as seamless as possible. Partially rolled-back code is a disaster waiting to happen, because you may be leaving an insecure configuration in place, or software dependencies with known vulnerabilities. Whatever release process you choose, you need to be able to reliably revert to a previous version of the codebase with minimal fuss.

##### Phase 5: Post-Release Testing and Observation

Post-release observation should happen in the form of three activities: logging, monitoring, and error reporting.

Logging, the practice of having code write to a log file as the software application performs actions, helps administrators see what a web server is doing at any given time. Your code should log every HTTP request (with a timestamp, URL, and the HTTP response code), as well as significant actions performed by users (for example, authentication and password-reset requests) and the site itself (for example, sending email and calling APIs).

Monitoring is the practice of measuring response times and other metrics on your website at runtime. Monitoring your web server and database helps administrators spot high-load scenarios or degraded performance by firing alerts when network speeds slow or database queries take a long time.  You should pass HTTP and database response times into monitoring software, which should, in turn, raise alerts when server and database response times pass certain thresholds. Many cloud platforms have monitoring software built in, so take the time to configure your error conditions and your chosen alerting system appropriately.

You should use error reporting to capture and record unexpected errors in the code. You can establish error conditions by either picking them out of logs or capturing and recording them in the code itself. You can then collate those error conditions in a datastore you make available to administrators. Many security intrusions exploit badly handled error conditions, so be sure to pay attention to unexpected errors as they occur.











