Not everybody linking to your site has good intentions. An attacker can trick a user into clicking a malicious link that triggers undesirable or unexpected side effects. This is called **cross-site request forgery** (**CSRF** or **XSRF**). Security researchers sometimes pronounce CSRF as “sea-surf.”

Attackers usually launch CSRF attacks by exploiting websites that implement `GET` requests that change the state of a web server. A `GET` request is triggered when a victim clicks a link, allowing the attacker to craft misleading links into the target site that perform unexpected actions. `GET` requests are the only type of HTTP request that contain the entirety of the request’s contents in a URL, so they’re uniquely vulnerable to CSRF attacks.

In an early iteration of Twitter, you could create tweets via `GET` requests rather than the `POST` requests the site currently uses. This oversight made Twitter vulnerable to CSRF attacks: it made it possible to create URL links that, when clicked, would post on a user’s timeline. The following link would have tweeted the text `in ur twitter CSRF-ing ur tweets` to a victim’s timeline when clicked: 

`https://twitter.com/share/update?status=in%20ur%20twitter%20CSRF-ing%20ur%20tweets`

One canny hacker used this loophole to create a viral **worm** on Twitter. Because they could use a single `GET` request to write a tweet, they constructed a malicious link that, when clicked, would post a tweet containing an obscene message and the same malicious link. When readers of the tweet clicked the link that the first victim tweeted, they too were tricked into tweeting the same thing.

The hacker tricked a handful of victims into clicking the malicious link, and those victims tweeted unexpected posts on the timelines. As more and more users read the original tweets and clicked the embedded link out of curiosity, they too tweeted the same thing. Soon, tens of thousands of Twitter users were being tricked into expressing their desire to molest goats (the content of the initial tweet). The first Twitter worm was born, and the Twitter development team scrambled to close the security hole before things got out of hand.

##### Mitigation 1: Follow REST Principles

To protect your users against CSRF attacks, make sure that your `GET` requests don’t change the state of the server. Your website should use `GET` requests only to fetch web pages or other resources. You should perform actions that change server state—for example, logging the user in or out, resetting passwords, writing posts, or closing an account—only through `PUT`, `POST`, or `DELETE` requests. This design philosophy, called **Representational State Transfer** (**REST**), comes with a host of other benefits besides CSRF protection.

##### Mitigation 2: Implement Anti-CSRF Cookies

Defusing your `GET` requests shuts the door on most CSRF attacks, but you still need to protect against requests using the other HTTP verbs. Attacks using those verbs are much less common than GET-based CSRF attacks, and require much more work, but an attacker might try them if they think the payoff is sufficient.

For instance, they can trick a user into initiating a `POST` request to your site by having the victim submit a malicious form or script hosted on a third-party site under the attacker’s control. If your site performs sensitive actions in response to `POST` requests, you need to use anti-CSRF cookies to ensure that these requests are initiated only from within your site. Sensitive actions should be triggered only from your own login forms and JavaScript, rather than malicious pages that may trick the user into performing unexpected actions.

An **anti-CSRF cookie** is a randomized string token that the web server writes out to a named cookie parameter. Recall that cookies are small pieces of text passed back and forth between the browser and web server in HTTP headers. If the web server returns an HTTP response containing a header value like `Set-Cookie: _xsrf=5978e29d4ef434a1`, the browser will send back the same information in the next HTTP request in a header with form `Cookie: _xsrf=5978e29d4ef434a1`.

Secure websites use **anti-CSRF cookies** to verify that POST requests originate from pages hosted on the same web domain. HTML pages on the site add this same string token as an `<input type="hidden" name="_xsrf" value="5978e29d4ef434a1">` element in any HTML form used to generate POST requests. When a user submits the form to the server, and the `_xsrf` value in the returned cookie doesn’t match the `_xsrf` value in the request body, the server rejects the request entirely. This way, the server validates and ensures that the request originated from within the site rather than from a malicious third-party site; the browser will send the required cookie only when the web page is loaded from the same domain.

Most modern web servers support **anti-CSRF cookies**. Make sure to consult the security documentation of your chosen web server to understand how they implement these cookies, since the syntax varies slightly among web servers. Listing 8-2 shows a template file for the **Tornado web server** that includes anti-CSRF protection.

```html
<!-- Listing 8-2: A template file for the Tornado web server in Python that includes anti-CSRF protection -->

<form action="/new_message" method="post">    
  {% module xsrf_form_html() %}   
  <input type="text" name="message"/>   
  <input type="submit" value="Post"/> 
</form>
```

In this example, the `xsrf_form_html()` function generates a randomized token and writes it out in the HTML form as an input element like so: `<input type="hidden" name="_xsrf" value="5978e29d4ef434a1">`. The Tornado web server then writes out this same token in the HTTP response headers as `Set-Cookie: _xsrf=5978e29d4ef434a1`. When the user submits the form, the web server validates that the token from the form and the token in the return Cookie header match. The browser security model will return cookies according to the same-origin policy, so the cookie values can only have been set by the web server. Hence the server can be sure that the POST request originated from the host website.

You should use **anti-CSRF cookies** to validate HTTP requests made from JavaScript, too, which allows you to also protect PUT and DELETE requests. The JavaScript needs to query out the **anti-CSRF token** from the HTML, and pass it back to the server in the HTTP request.

##### Mitigation 3: Use the SameSite Cookie Attribute

The final protection against CSRF attacks you must implement is to specify a `SameSite` attribute when you set cookies. By default, when a browser generates a request to your website, it will attach to the request the last known cookies that the site set, regardless of the source of the request. This means that malicious cross-site requests will arrive at your web server with any security cookies you previously set. This doesn’t defeat anti-CSRF measures in and of itself, but if an attacker steals the security token from your HTML forms, and installs it in their own malicious forms, they can still launch a CSRF attack.

Specifying a `SameSite` attribute when you set a cookie tells the browser to strip cookies on a request to your site when the request is generated from an external domain—like a malicious website set up by an attacker. Setting a cookie with the `SameSite=Strict` syntax in Listing 8-3 ensures that the browser will send the cookie only with requests initiated from within your own site.

```htaccess
# Listing 8-3: Setting the SameSite attribute to our anti-CSRF cookie ensures that the cookie attaches to only requests from our site.

Set-Cookie: _xsrf=5978e29d4ef434a1; SameSite=Strict;
```

It’s a good idea to set a `SameSite` attribute on all your cookies, not just those used for CSRF protection. There’s a caveat to this, however: if you use cookies for session management, setting the `SameSite` attribute to your session cookie strips the cookie of any requests to your site generated from other websites. This means that any inbound links to your site will force the user to log in again.

This behavior can be a little annoying for users who already have a session open on your site. Imagine if you had to log back into Facebook every time somebody shared a video. Frustrating, right? To prevent this behavior, Listing 8-4 shows a more useful value of the `SameSite` attribute, `Lax`, that allows only `GET` requests from other sites to send cookies.

```htaccess
# Listing 8-4: Setting the SameSite attribute on an HTTP cookie allows cookies on GET requests.

Set-Cookie: session_id=82938d911e13f3; SameSite=Lax;
```

This allows seamless linking into your site, but strips the ability of an attacker to forge malicious actions such as POST requests. Provided your GET requests are side-effect free, this setting is no less safe.

##### Bonus Mitigation: Require Reauthentication for Sensitive Actions

You might notice that some websites force you to reconfirm your login details when you perform sensitive actions, such as when you change your password or initiate a payment. This is known as **reauthentication**, and it’s a common way to secure sites against CSRF attacks, because it gives the user a clear indication that you’re about to do something significant and potentially dangerous. 

Reauthentication also has the positive side effect of protecting your users if they accidentally leave themselves logged in on shared or stolen devices. If your website handles financial transactions or confidential data, you should strongly consider forcing your users to reenter their credentials when they perform sensitive actions.















