### Implementing Authentication

Authentication is part of the HyperText Transfer Protocol. To present an authentication challenge, a web server needs to return a 401 status code in the HTTP response and add a `WWW-Authenticate` header describing the preferred authentication method. (There are two commonly supported authentication methods: **basic authentication** and **digest authentication**.) To fulfill this requirement, the user agent—usually a web browser—needs to request a username and password from the user, thus creating the login functionality.

In the **basic authentication** scheme, the browser concatenates the username and password supplied by the user with a colon (`:`) character between them, generating the string `username:password`. It then uses the **Base64** algorithm to encode this string and send it back to the server in the Authorization header of an HTTP request. 

The **digest authentication** scheme is a little more complex, and requires the browser to generate a hash consisting of the username, password, and URL. A hash is the output of a one-way encryption algorithm that makes it easy to generate a unique “fingerprint” for a set of input data, but makes it difficult to guess the input values if you have only the algorithm’s output.

Attackers often attempt to compromise your site at the point of authentication by guessing passwords. They usually use brute-force attacks, which use scripts to try thousands of commonly used passwords against a login page.

### Mitigation 1: Use Third-Party Authentication

The most secure authentication system is the one you don’t have to write yourself. Instead of implementing your own authentication system, consider using a third-party service like Facebook Login, which allows users to authenticate to your website with their social media credentials.

### Mitigation 2: Integrate with Single Sign-On

If you integrate with an **OAuth** or **OpenID** identity provider, your users will usually use their personal email addresses as usernames. However, if your website’s target audience is business users, consider integrating with a **single sign-on** (**SSO**) identity provider like **Okta**, **OneLogin**, or **Centrify**, which centralizes authentication across enterprise systems so employees can log in seamlessly to third-party applications under their business email. Company administrators retain ultimate control over which employees can access what sites, and user credentials are stored securely on the company’s servers.

To integrate with a **single sign-on** provider, you’ll usually have to use **Security Assertion Markup Language** (**SAML**), which is an older (and less friendly) standard than **OAuth** or **OpenID**, though most programming languages have mature **SAML** libraries you can use.

### Mitigation 3: Secure Your Own Authentication System

##### Requiring Usernames, Email Address, or Both

###### Validating Email Addresses

Emails that a website generates are called transactional emails, because the website sends them in response to a user action. Sending transactional emails to unverified addresses will quickly get you blacklisted by your email service provider, since they’re wary of enabling spammers.

###### Banning Disposable Email Accounts

###### Securing Password Resets

Password-reset links should be short-lived, and should expire after the user uses them. A good rule of thumb is to expire reset tokens after 30 minutes to prevent an attacker from abusing stale reset links. If an attacker hacks a user’s email account, you can’t let them search for emails containing reset links and then use those links to access your site under the victim’s account.

##### Requiring Complex Passwords

At the very least, you should enforce a minimum length of eight characters for passwords, but the longer the better. (Studies have shown that password length is more important than mixing in unusual characters.)

##### Securely Storing Passwords

###### Hashing Passwords

Numerous cryptographic hash algorithms exist, each with varying implementations and strengths. A good hashing algorithm should be quick to calculate, but not too quick. Otherwise, as computation speeds increase, brute-force attempts to crack the password by enumerating all possible inputs become feasible. For this reason, a good algorithm to use is **bcrypt**.

###### Salting Hashes

Hashing passwords makes your site more secure, but users are frequently unimaginative in their password choice. When cracking password lists—reverse engineering passwords for a list of leaked password hashes—hackers frequently use **rainbow tables**, which are lists of commonly used passwords that have been put through a known hashing algorithm. Matching hashes against precalculated values yield a very good return for an attacker, allowing them to determine the password for many, if not most, of the hashes.

To protect against **rainbow table attacks**, you need to salt your password hashes, which means adding an element of randomness to the hashing algorithm so the input password doesn’t solely determine the generated hash. You can store the salt input value in your configuration, or better yet, generate a salt input value separately for each user and store it alongside their password hash. This makes rainbow table attacks unfeasible, since an attacker has to regenerate the entire rainbow table for each salt value you use, which is computationally prohibitive and thus takes too long.

##### Requiring Multifactor Authentication

##### Implementing and Securing the Logout Function

Your logout function should clear the session cookie in the browser, and invalidate the session identifier if you are storing it on the server side. This protects against attackers who manage to intercept session cookies after the fact and attempt to reestablish a session using a stolen cookie. Clearing the session cookie is as simple as sending back an HTTP response containing a `Set-Cookie` header with a blank value for your session parameter.

##### Preventing User Enumeration

You can cut down the risk of an attacker compromising your authentication system if they can’t enumerate users, which means testing each username from a list to see whether it exists on your website.

###### Preventing Potential Enumeration Vulnerabilities

It’s important to keep the error messages generic. For example, simply use the error message `an incorrect username or password was entered` whenever the username is unrecognized or the password is incorrect.

Attackers may also use **timing attacks** to enumerate users by measuring HTTP response times. Hashing a password is a time-consuming operation; though it typically takes less than a second, it’s still a measurable amount of time. If your site calculates password hashes only when a user enters a valid username, an attacker can measure the slightly slower response time to infer which accounts exist on the site. Make sure your site calculates password hashes during authentication even for invalid usernames.

You should prevent your password-reset screen from revealing that a username exists, too. If an attacker clicks a “Forgotten password” link and types in an email address to request a password-reset link, the response message on the page shouldn’t reveal whether a reset email was sent. This prevents the attacker from knowing whether that email address is tied to an account on your site. Keep the message neutral: something like `Check your inbox`.

###### Implementing CAPTCHA

You can also defuse user enumeration attacks by implementing a **CAPTCHA** (**Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart**), which asks web users to perform various image recognition tasks that are trivial for humans but tricky for computers.

CAPTCHAs aren’t perfect. Attackers can defeat them by using sophisticated machine learning techniques, or by paying human users to complete a task in their stead. However, they are generally reliable enough to deter most hacking attempts, and you can easily add them to a website. For example, Google implements a CAPTCHA widget called **reCAPTCHA** that you can install on your site with a few lines of code.















