The HyperText Transfer Protocol Secure is the most widely used form of encryption on the web. Web servers and web browsers universally support HTTPS, so the developer can divert all traffic to that protocol and guarantee secure communication for their users. A web developer who wants to use HTTPS on their site needs only to obtain a **certificate** from a **certificate authority** and install it with their hosting provider.

### Encryption in the Internet Protocol

TCP does nothing to disguise the content of the packets being sent. Unsecured TCP conversations are vulnerable to **man-in-the-middle** attacks, whereby malicious third parties intercept and read the packets as they are transmitted.

To avoid this, HTTP conversations between a browser and a web server are secured by **Transport Layer Security** (**TLS**), a method of encryption that provides both privacy (by ensuring data packets can’t be deciphered by a third party) and **data integrity** (by ensuring that any attempt to tamper with the packets in transit will be detectable). HTTP conversations conducted using TLS are called **HTTP Secure** (HTTPS) conversations.

##### Encryption Algorithms, Hashing, and Message Authentication Codes

An **encryption algorithm** takes input data and scrambles it by using an **encryption key**—a secret shared between two parties wishing to initiate secure communication. The scrambled output is indecipherable to anyone without a **decryption key**—the corresponding key required to unscramble the data. The input data and keys are typically encoded as binary data, though the keys may be expressed as strings of text for readability.

###### Symmetric Encryption Algorithms

A **symmetric encryption algorithm** uses the same key to encrypt and decrypt data. Symmetric encryption algorithms usually operate as **block ciphers**: they break the input data into fixed-size blocks that can be individually encrypted. (If the last block of input data is undersized, it will be padded to fill out the block size.) This makes them suitable for processing streams of data, including TCP data packets.

Symmetric algorithms are designed for speed but have one major security flaw: the decryption key must be given to the receiving party before they decrypt the data stream. If the decryption key is shared over the internet, potential attackers will have an opportunity to steal the key, which allows them to decrypt any further messages. Not good.

###### Asymmetric Encryption Algorithms

In response to the threat of decryption keys being stolen, **asymmetric encryption algorithms** were developed. Asymmetric algorithms use different keys to encrypt and decrypt data. 

An asymmetric algorithm allows a piece of software such as a web server to publish its encryption key freely, while keeping its decryption key a secret. Any user agent looking to send secure messages to the server can encrypt those messages by using the server’s encryption key, secure in the knowledge that nobody (not even themselves!) will be able to decipher the data being sent, because the decryption key is kept secret. This is sometimes described as **public-key cryptography**: the encryption key (the *public key*) can be published; only the decryption key (the *private key*) needs to be kept secret.

Asymmetric algorithms are significantly more complex and hence slower than symmetric algorithms.

###### Hash Functions

Related to encryption algorithms are **cryptographic hash functions**, which can be thought of as encryption algorithms whose output *cannot* be decrypted. Hash functions also have a couple of other interesting properties: the output of the algorithm (the *hashed value*) is always a fixed size, regardless of the size of input data; and the chances of getting the same output value, given different input values, is astronomically small.

Why on earth would you want to encrypt data you couldn’t subsequently decrypt? Well, it’s a neat way to generate a “fingerprint” for input data. If you need to check that two separate inputs are the same but don’t want to store the raw input values for security reasons, you can verify that both inputs produce the same hashed value.

###### Message Authentication Codes

**Message authentication code** (**MAC**) algorithms are similar to (and generally built on top of) cryptographic hash functions, in that they map input data of an arbitrary length to a unique, fixed-sized output. This output is itself called a **message authentication code**. MAC algorithms are more specialized than hash functions, however, because recalculating a MAC requires a *secret key*. This means that only the parties in possession of the *secret key* can generate or check the validity of message authentication codes.

MAC algorithms are used to ensure that the data packets transmitted on the internet cannot be forged or tampered with by an attacker. To use a MAC algorithm, the sending and receiving computers exchange a shared, secret key—usually as part of the TLS handshake. (The secret key will itself be encrypted before it is sent, to avoid the risk of it being stolen.) From that point onward, the sender will generate a MAC for each data packet being sent and attach the MAC to the packet. Because the recipient computer has the same key, it can recalculate the MAC from the message. If the calculated MAC differs from the value attached to the packet, this is evidence that the packet has been tampered with or corrupted in some form, or it was not sent by the original computer. Hence, the recipient rejects the data packet.

### The TLS Handshake

TLS uses a combination of cryptographic algorithms to efficiently and safely pass information. For speed, most data packets passed over TLS will be encrypted using a symmetric encryption algorithm commonly referred to as the *block cipher*, since it encrypts “blocks” of streaming information. Recall that symmetric encryption algorithms are vulnerable to having their encryption keys stolen by malicious users eavesdropping on the conversation. To safely pass the *encryption/decryption key* for the block cipher, TLS will encrypt the key by using an *asymmetric* algorithm before passing it to the recipient. Finally, data packets passed using TLS will be tagged using a *message authentication code*, to detect if any data has been tampered with.

At the start of a TLS conversation, the browser and website perform a *TLS handshake* to determine how they should communicate. In the first stage of the handshake, the browser will list multiple **cipher suites** that it supports.

##### Cipher Suites

A **cipher suite** is a set of algorithms used to secure communication. Under the TLS standard, a cipher suite consists of *three* separate algorithms. The first algorithm, the **key-exchange algorithm**, is an asymmetric encryption algorithm. This is used by communicating computers to exchange secret keys for the second encryption algorithm: the symmetric block cipher designed for encrypting the content of TCP packets. Finally, the cipher suite specifies a MAC algorithm for authenticating the encrypted messages.

Let’s make this more concrete. A modern web browser such as Google Chrome that supports TLS 1.3 offers numerous cipher suites. At the time of writing, one of these suites goes by the catchy name of `ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256`. This particular cipher suite includes `ECDHE-RSA` as the key-exchange algorithm, `AES-128-GCM` as the block cipher, and `SHA-256` as the message authentication algorithm.

Want some more, entirely unnecessary, detail? Well, **ECDHE** stands for **Elliptic Curve Diffie–Hellman Exchange** (a modern method of establishing a shared secret over an insecure channel). **RSA** stands for the **Rivest–Shamir–Adleman** algorithm (the first practical asymmetric encryption algorithm, invented by three mathematicians in the 1970s after drinking a lot of Passover wine). **AES** stands for the **Advanced Encryption Standard** (an algorithm invented by two Belgian cryptographers and selected by the National Institute of Standards and Technology through a three-year review process). This particular variant uses a 128-bit key in Galois/Counter Mode, which is specified by **GCM** in the name. Finally, **SHA-256** stands for the **Secure Hash Algorithm** (a hash function with a 256-bit word size).

##### Session Initiation

Let’s continue where we left off. In the second stage of the TLS handshake, the web server selects the most secure **cipher suite** it can support and then instructs the browser to use those algorithms for communication. At the same time, the server passes back a **digital certificate**, containing the server name, the trusted certificate authority that will vouch for the authenticity of the certificate, and the web server’s *encryption key* to be used in the key-exchange algorithm.

Once the browser verifies the authenticity of the certificate, the two computers generate a session key that will be used to encrypt the TLS conversation with the chosen **block cipher**. (Note that this session key is different from the HTTP session identifier discussed in previous chapters. TLS handshakes occur at a lower level of the Internet Protocol than the HTTP conversation, which has not begun yet.) The session key is a large random number generated by the browser, encrypted with the *(public) encryption key* attached to the **digital certificate** using the key-exchange algorithm, and transmitted to the server.

Now, finally, the TLS conversation can begin. Everything past this point will be securely encrypted using the **block cipher** and the **shared session identifier**, so the data packets will be indecipherable to anyone snooping on the conversation. The browser and server use the agreed-upon encryption algorithm and session key to encrypt packets in both directions. Data packets are also authenticated and tamper-proof, using **message authentication codes**.

### Enabling HTTPS

##### Digital Certificates

A **digital certificate** (also known as a **public-key certificate**) is an electronic document used to prove ownership of a **public encryption key**. Digital certificates are used in TLS to associate *encryption keys* with internet domains (such as `example.com`). They are issued by certificate authorities, which act as a trusted third party between a browser and a website, vouching that a given encryption key should be used to encrypt data being sent to the website’s domain. Browser software will trust a few hundred certificate authorities—for example, **Comodo**, **DigiCert**, and, more recently, the nonprofit **Let’s Encrypt**. When a trusted certificate authority vouches for a key and domain, it assures your browser that it’s communicating with the right website using the right encryption key, thereby blocking an attacker from presenting a malicious website or certificate.

You might ask: why is a third party required to exchange encryption keys on the internet? After all, isn’t the whole point of asymmetric encryption that the public key can be made available freely by the server itself? While this statement is true, the actual process of fetching an encryption key on the internet depends on the reliability of the internet’s Domain Name System (DNS) that maps domain names to IP addresses. Under some circumstances, DNS is vulnerable to spoofing attacks that can be used to direct internet traffic away from a legitimate server to an IP address controlled by an attacker. If an attacker can spoof an internet domain, they can issue their own encryption key, and victims would be none the wiser.

Certificate authorities exist to prevent encrypted traffic from being spoofed. Should an attacker find a way to divert traffic from a legitimate (secure) website to a malicious server under their control, that attacker will typically not possess the decryption key corresponding to the website’s certificate. This means they will be unable to decrypt intercepted traffic that was encrypted using the encryption key attached to the site’s digital certificate. 

On the other hand, if the attacker presents an alternative digital certificate corresponding to a decryption key that they do possess, that certificate will not have been verified by a trusted certificate authority. Any browser visiting the spoofed website will show a security warning to the user, strongly dissuading them from continuing.

##### Installing a Digital Certificate

###### Web Servers vs. Application Servers

The first of the applications that runs a typical website is a web server that serves static content and performs low-level TCP functions. This will typically be something like Nginx or the Apache HTTP Server. Web servers are written in C and optimized to quickly perform low-level TCP functions.

The second application of the pair is an application server, which sits downstream from the web server and hosts the code and templates that make up that dynamic content of the site. Many application servers are available for each programming language. A typical application server might be Tomcat or Jetty for websites written in the Java languages; Puma or Unicorn for Ruby on Rails websites; Django, Flask, or Tornado for Python websites; and so on.

Rather confusingly, web developers will often casually refer to the application server they use as “the web server,” since that is the environment they spent most of the time writing code for. In actual fact, it’s perfectly possible to deploy an application server on its own, because an application server can do everything a web server can, albeit less efficiently. This is a fairly typical setup when a web developer is writing and testing code on their own machine.

###### Configuring Your Web Server to Use HTTPS

Digital certificates and encryption keys are almost always deployed to web servers, since they are much faster than application servers. Switching over a web server to use HTTPS is a matter of updating the web server’s configuration so that it accepts traffic on the standard HTTPS port (443), and telling it the location of the digital certificate and key pair to be used when establishing the TLS session. The following code shows how to add the certificate into the configuration file for the Nginx web server.

```nginx
server {     
  listen              443 ssl;     
  server_name         www.example.com;     
  ssl_certificate     www.example.com.crt;     
  ssl_certificate_key www.example.com.key;     
  ssl_protocols       TLSv1.2 TLSv1.3;     
  ssl_ciphers         HIGH:!aNULL:!MD5; 
}
```

Web servers that handle TLS functionality in this way will decrypt incoming HTTPS requests, and pass any requests that need to be handled by the application server downstream as unencrypted HTTP requests. This is called **terminating HTTPS** at the web server: traffic between the web and application server is not secure (because the encryption has been stripped), but this isn’t usually a security risk because traffic is not leaving the physical machine (or at least, will only be passed over a private network).

###### What About HTTP?

```nginx
# Redirecting all HTTP to HTTPS on the Nginx web server

server {     
  listen 80 default_server;     
  server_name _;     
  return 301 https://$host$request_uri; 
}
```

###### HTTP Strict Transport Security

At this point, your site is set up to securely communicate with the browser, and any browsers using HTTP will get redirected to HTTPS. You have one final loophole to take care of: you need to ensure that sensitive data will not be sent during any initial connection over HTTP. 

When a browser visits a site it has seen previously, the browser sends back any cookies the website previously supplied in the `Cookie` header of a request. If the initial connection to the website is done over HTTP, that cookie information will be passed insecurely, even if the subsequent requests and responses get upgraded to HTTPS.

Your website should instruct browsers to send cookies only over an HTTPS connection by implementing an **HTTP Strict Transport Security** (**HSTS**) policy.  You do this by setting the header `Strict-Transport-Security` in your responses. A modern browser encountering this header will remember to connect to your site only using HTTPS. Even if the user explicitly types in an HTTP address like `http://www.example.com`, the browser will switch to using HTTPS without being prompted. This protects cookies from being stolen during the initial connection to your site. Listing 13-4 shows how to add a `Strict-Transport-Security` header when using Nginx.

```nginx
# Listing 13-4: Setting up HTTP Strict Transport Security in Nginx

server {     
  add_header Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000" always; 
}
```

### Attacking HTTP (and HTTPS)

##### Wireless Routers

Wireless routers are a common target for **man-in-the-middle** attacks. Most routers contain a bare-bones installation of the Linux operating system, which enables them to route traffic to a **local internet service provider** (ISP) and host a simple configuration interface. This is a perfect target for a hacker, because the Linux installation will typically never be updated with security patches—and the same operating system version will be installed in many thousands of homes.

In May 2018, Cisco security researchers discovered that over half a million *Linksys* and *Netgear* routers had been infected with a piece of malware called **VPNFilter**, which snooped on HTTP traffic passing through the router, stealing website passwords and other sensitive user data on behalf of an unknown attacker thought to be linked to the Russian government. VPNFilter even attempted to perform *downgrade* attacks, interfering with the initial TLS handshake to popular sites so that the browser opted to use weaker encryption or no encryption at all.

Sites using HTTPS would have been immune to this attack, because HTTPS traffic is indecipherable to anyone but the recipient site. Traffic to other websites was likely stolen by hackers and mined for sensitive data.

##### Wi-Fi Hotspots

A lower-tech way for a hacker to launch a **man-in-the-middle** attack is to simply set up their own Wi-Fi hotspot in a public place. Few of us pay much attention to the name of the Wi-Fi hotspots our devices use, so it’s easy for an attacker to set up a hotspot in a public space like a café or hotel lobby and wait for unwary users to connect to it. Because TCP traffic will flow through the hacker’s device on its way to the ISP, the hacker will be able to record the traffic to disk and comb through it to extract sensitive details like credit card numbers and passwords. The only indication to the victim that anything untoward has happened occurs when the attacker leaves the physical location and shuts down the hotspot, disconnecting their victims from the internet. Encrypting traffic defeats this attack, since the hacker will not be able to read any traffic they captured.







