In JavaScript, variables and functions can be accessed before their actual declaration, and the term used to describe this in JavaScript is “Hoisting.”

### “var” declarations

The term “hoisting” is mostly associated with function declarations and variables declared with the “var” keyword. Let’s take a look at how hoisting is associated with the “var” variables.

Consider the following code example:

```js
console.log(result); // undefined 
var result = 5 + 10;
```

The output of the above code shows hoisting in action. The first line in the above code outputs undefined on the console, but how is this possible? How are we able to access the result variable before it is actually declared on the second line? 

This is made possible because of the parsing step before the code is executed. The preprocessing of the JavaScript code before its execution allows the JavaScript engine to detect some errors early before any code is executed. The following code example shows this in action:

```js
function print(obj) { 
  console.log(obj; // error 
} 

console.log("hello world");
```

Without any preprocessing of the code, the JavaScript engine cannot detect the syntax error inside the print function unless the function is invoked or called, and the above code should log “hello world” on the console without throwing any errors because the function containing the syntax error hasn’t been called. But the above code throws an error instead of logging “hello world” on the console. Why is that? The answer is the processing step before the code execution.

The JavaScript engine scans the code before executing it, allowing it to detect some errors before any code is executed. This also enables the engine to handle variable declarations by registering the variables declared in the current scope. Before any scope starts, all the variables declared in that scope are registered for that scope. In other words, all the variables declared in a scope are reserved for that scope before the code in that scope is executed. This preprocessing of the code before its execution is what enables hoisting. This allows us to refer to “var” variables before they are actually declared in the code.

Let us revisit the code example given above that logs undefined to the console.

```js
console.log(result); // undefined 
var result = 5 + 10;
```

If the “var” variables are hoisted, and we can refer to them before their declaration, then why is undefined logged on the console instead of the actual value of the result variable, which should be 15? 

The thing with the hoisting of the “var” variables is that only their declaration is hoisted, not their values. These variables are assigned the value of undefined, and the actual value, 15 in the above code example, is assigned when their declaration is executed during the step-by-step execution of the code.

### Function declarations

```js
startCar(); // starting the car...

function startCar() { 
  console.log("starting the car..."); 
}
```

If “var” variables are assigned a value of undefined before their declaration is executed, how are we able to call the function before its declaration? How is the hoisting of function declarations different from the hoisting of variables declared using the var keyword? The difference here is that in the case of function declarations, the function’s name is registered as a variable in the scope containing the function declaration, and it is initialized with the function itself.

In the above code example, the startCar is registered as a variable in the global scope, and it is assigned the function. Unlike the “var” variables, there is no initialization with the undefined value in the case of function declarations.

### Function declarations inside blocks

#### Standard rules

According to the standard rules, the function declarations inside blocks are hoisted to the top of the block, converted into a function expression, and assigned to a variable declared with the let keyword.

The function hoisted inside the block is limited to the containing block and cannot be accessed by code outside the block containing the function.

It is important to note that the standard rules only come into effect in strict mode.

```js
"use strict"; 

function process() { 
  if (true) { 
    console.log("processing..."); 
    
    function fnInsideBlock() { 
      console.log("I am inside a block"); 
    } 
  } 
}
```

According to the standard rules, the function inside the if block should be treated as shown below:

```js
"use strict"; 

function process() { 
  if (true) { 
    let fnInsideBlock = function fnInsideBlock() { 
      console.log("I am inside a block"); 
    }; 
    
    console.log("processing..."); 
  } 
}
```

The fnInsideBlock function in the above code can only be called from within the if block.

#### Legacy rules

The legacy rules are applied to the non-strict code in web browsers. According to the legacy rules, apart from a let variable for a function declaration inside a block, there is also a var variable in the containing function scope.

```js
"use strict"; 

function process() { 
  if (true) { 
    console.log("processing..."); 
    
    function fnInsideBlock() { 
      console.log("I am inside a block"); 
    } 
  } 
  
  fnInsideBlock(); 
}  

process(); // error
```

As the above code is executed in strict mode, the standard rules apply; as a result, the above code throws an error because, as explained in the above section, the function inside the block is hoisted to the top of the containing scope and is only accessible inside that block. As a result, the function call outside the if block throws an error.

If the "use strict" directive is removed from the above code, it will execute without any error. Why is that? This is because, in non-strict mode, the legacy rules for function declarations in a block apply, and according to the legacy rules, the hoisted function inside the block is assigned to a var variable that is declared in the containing function scope.

```js
function process() { 
  var fnInsideBlockVar; 
  
  if (true) { 
    let fnInsideBlock = function fnInsideBlock() { 
      console.log("I am inside a block"); 
    }; 
    
    console.log("processing..."); 
    
    fnInsideBlockVar = fnInsideBlock; 
  } 
  
  fnInsideBlockVar(); 
} 

process();
```

In the transformed code above, fnInsideBlockVar and fnInsideBlock are the same variables handled behind the scenes by the JavaScript engines. The names are shown to be different just for the sake of explaining how the function declarations in blocks are handled according to the legacy rules.

Now, it should be clear why removing the “use strict” directive allows the code to be executed without any error. The hoisted function inside the block is assigned to a var variable defined in the function scope. As a result, the function inside the block is accessible outside the containing if block.

##### Further reading

[What are the precise semantics of block-level functions in ES6? - (stackoverflow post)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/31419897/what-are-the-precise-semantics-of-block-level-functions-in-es6 )

[Why does block assigned value change global variable? - (stackoverflow post)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/61191014/why-does-block-assigned-value-change-global-variable )

[Function declaration in block moving temporary value outside of block? - (stackoverflow post)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/58619924/function-declaration-in-block-moving-temporary-value-outside-of-block)

### Class declarations

Like function declarations, class declarations are also hoisted, but they are hoisted differently compared to the function declarations.

While we can access a function declaration before its declaration, we cannot do the same in the case of class declarations. Doesn’t that mean that the class declarations aren’t hoisted? No, they are hoisted, but differently.

```js
let Car = "Honda"; 

if (true) { 
  console.log(Car); // Uncaught ReferenceError: Cannot access 'Car' before initialization 
  
  class Car {} 
}
```

The above code throws an error that proves that the class declarations are indeed hoisted.

If the class declarations weren’t hoisted, then the console.log function call should have logged “Honda” to the console, but that isn’t the case, and that is because the class declaration inside the if block is hoisted and any code, before or after the Car declaration inside the block, that accesses Car will access the class declaration and not the Car variable declared above the if statement. The fact that the identifier Car inside the if block refers to the class declaration and not the Car variable declared before the if statement proves that the class declarations are indeed hoisted.

So, if class declarations are hoisted, then why can’t we access them before their declaration? The answer to this question is the “**Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ)**”.

### Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ)

Temporal Dead Zone (TDZ) refers to the time during which the block-scoped variables (let, const) or class declarations cannot be accessed. The time starts from the start of the scope till the declaration is executed.

```js
{ 
  // TDZ start 
  console.log("hello"); 
  console.log("world"); 
  let count = 5; // TDZ end 
  
  // can access "count" after TDZ ends 
}
```

TDZ is the reason class declarations cannot be accessed before their declaration is executed during the step-by-step execution of the code.

#### let and const

As TDZ also applies to the let and const, are the variables declared using let or constants using const also hoisted? Yes, they are also hoisted, but, like the class declarations, they are hoisted differently because of the TDZ.

It is a common misconception that block-scoped variables and constants are not hoisted, but as we discussed above, they are hoisted; it’s just that their hoisting is different as compared to the hoisting of variables declared using the var keyword.

```js
var count = 5; 

{ 
  console.log(count); // hoisted but cannot access due to TDZ 
  										// Uncaught ReferenceError: Cannot access 'count' before initialization
  let count = 10; 
}
```

### Function and class expressions

The function and class expression are not hoisted. Consider the following code example:

```js
console.log(Car); // undefined 
console.log(Person); // undefined 

Person() // Uncaught TypeError: Person is not a function

var Car = class { 
  constructor(model) { 
    this.model = model; 
  } 
};

var Person = function (name) { 
  this.name = name; 
};
```

In the above code example, as the variables Car and Person have been declared using the var keyword, we can access them before their declaration, and their value are undefined. This is because only the declarations are hoisted, not their values. In the above code example, the values are expressions, and they are not hoisted.

If we try to create an instance of the Car class or call the Person constructor, we will get an error. It is worth noting that the error we get in this case is not a reference error (an error that is thrown in the case of undeclared identifiers) but a type error, and this is because Car and Person are hoisted and initialized with the value of undefined, and we cannot call an undefined as a constructor function. Recall that only the declarations are hoisted in this case, not their values.

JavaScript engines don’t move the hoisted declarations to the top of the file. Instead, they simply process the declarations before the step-by-step execution of the code. In the case of var variables, they are assigned the value of undefined until their declaration is executed. In the case of blockscoped variables, they are marked as “uninitialized”.