### An Overview of SQL Migrations

#### Installing the migrate tool

To manage SQL migrations in this project we’re going to use the [migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) command-line tool (which itself is written in Go).

```sh
$ brew install golang-migrate
```

### Working with SQL Migrations

```sh
$ migrate create -seq -ext=.sql -dir=./migrations create_movies_table
```

- The -seq flag indicates that we want to use sequential numbering like 0001, 0002, ...
  for the migration files (instead of a Unix timestamp, which is the default).
- The -ext flag indicates that we want to give the migration files the extension .sql.
- The -dir flag indicates that we want to store the migration files in the ./migrations directory (which will be created automatically if it doesn’t already exist).
- The name create_movies_table is a descriptive label that we give the migration files to signify their contents.

```sql
-- File: migrations/000001_create_movies_table.up.sql 

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS movies ( 
  id bigserial PRIMARY KEY,   
  created_at timestamp(0) with time zone NOT NULL DEFAULT NOW(),  
  title text NOT NULL,   
  year integer NOT NULL, 
  runtime integer NOT NULL,  
  genres text[] NOT NULL,  
  version integer NOT NULL DEFAULT 1 
);
```

Notice here how the fields and types in this table are analogous to the fields and types in the Movie struct that we created earlier? This is important because it means we’ll be able to easily map the data in each row of our movies table to a single Movie struct in our Go code.

```sql
-- File: migrations/000001_create_movies_table.down.sql 
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS movies;
```

```sh
$ migrate create -seq -ext=.sql -dir=./migrations add_movies_check_constraints
```

```sql
-- File: migrations/000002_add_movies_check_constraints.up.sql 

ALTER TABLE movies ADD CONSTRAINT movies_runtime_check CHECK (runtime >= 0); 

ALTER TABLE movies ADD CONSTRAINT movies_year_check CHECK (year BETWEEN 1888 AND date_part('year', now())); 

ALTER TABLE movies ADD CONSTRAINT genres_length_check CHECK (array_length(genres, 1) BETWEEN 1 AND 5);
```

```sql
-- File: migrations/000002_add_movies_check_constraints.down.sql 

ALTER TABLE movies DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS movies_runtime_check; 

ALTER TABLE movies DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS movies_year_check; 

ALTER TABLE movies DROP CONSTRAINT IF EXISTS genres_length_check;
```

#### Executing the migrations

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$GREENLIGHT_DB_DSN up 
1/u create_movies_table (16.570208ms)
2/u add_movies_check_constraints (23.2205ms)
```

**Important**: If you are using PostgreSQL v15, you may get the error `error: pq: permission denied for schema public...`  when running this command. If you do, this is because v15 revokes the CREATE permission from all users except a database owner. See this [StackOverflow post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/74110708/postgres-15-permission-denied-for-schema-public) for more information To get around this, set the database owner to the greenlight user: 

```sql
ALTER DATABASE greenlight OWNER TO greenlight; 
```

If that still doesn’t work, try explicitly granting the CREATE privileges to the greenlight user: 

```sql
GRANT CREATE ON DATABASE greenlight TO greenlight;
```

#### Additional Information

##### Migrating to a specific version

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$EXAMPLE_DSN version 
2
```

You can also migrate up or down to a specific version by using the `goto` command:

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$EXAMPLE_DSN goto 1
```

##### Executing down migrations

You can use the `down` command to roll-back by a specific number of migrations. For example, to rollback the most recent migration you would run:

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database =$EXAMPLE_DSN down 1
```

Personally, I generally prefer to use the `goto` command to perform roll-backs (as it’s more explicit about the target version) and reserve use of the `down` command for rolling-back all migrations, like so:

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$EXAMPLE_DSN down 
Are you sure you want to apply all down migrations? [y/N] 
y 
Applying all down migrations 
2/d create_bar_table (39.988791ms) 
1/d create_foo_table (59.460276ms)
```

Another variant of this is the `drop` command, which will remove all tables from the database including the `schema_migrations` table — but the database itself will remain, along with anything else that has been created like sequences and enums. Because of this, using `drop` can leave your database in a messy and unknown state, and it’s generally better to stick with the `down` command if you want to roll back everything. See this issue: [Postgres: migrate drop doesn't drop everything inside database](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate/issues/193)

##### Fixing errors in SQL migrations

It’s important to talk about what happens when you make a syntax error in your SQL migration files, because the behavior of the migrate tool can be a bit confusing to start with.

When you run a migration that contains an error, all SQL statements up to the erroneous one will be applied and then the migrate tool will exit with a message describing the error.
Similar to this:

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$EXAMPLE_DSN up 
1/u create_foo_table (36.6328ms) 
2/u create_bar_table (71.835442ms) 
error: migration failed: syntax error at end of input in line 0: CREATE TABLE (details: pq: syntax error at end of input)
```

If the migration file which failed contained multiple SQL statements, then it’s possible that the migration file was partially applied before the error was encountered. In turn, this means that the database is in an unknown state as far as the migrate tool is concerned.

Accordingly, the version field in the schema_migrations field will contain the number for the failed migration and the dirty field will be set to true. At this point, if you run another migration (even a ‘down’ migration) you will get an error message similar to this:

```
Dirty database version {X}. Fix and force version.
```

What you need to do is investigate the original error and figure out if the migration file which failed was partially applied. If it was, then you need to manually roll-back the partially applied migration.

Once that’s done, then you must also ‘force’ the version number in the schema_migrations table to the correct value. For example, to force the database version number to 1 you should use the force command like so:

```sh
$ migrate -path=./migrations -database=$EXAMPLE_DSN force 1
```

Once you force the version, the database is considered ‘clean’ and you should be able to run migrations again without any problem.

##### Running migrations on application startup

[Decoupling database migrations from server startup: why and how](https://pythonspeed.com/articles/schema-migrations-server-startup/)