## Authentication

**Authentication** is about confirming who a user is, whereas **authorization** is about checking whether that user is permitted to do something.

### Authentication Options

#### HTTP basic authentication

Perhaps the simplest way to determine who is making a request to your API is to use HTTP basic authentication.

With this method, the client includes an `Authorization` header with every request containing their credentials. The credentials need to be in the format `username:password` and base-64 encoded. So, for example, to authenticate as `alice@example.com:pa55word` the client would send the following header:

```
Authorization: Basic YWxpY2VAZXhhbXBsZS5jb206cGE1NXdvcmQ=
```

In your API, you can then extract the credentials from this header using Go’s [Request.BasicAuth()](https://pkg.go.dev/net/http#Request.BasicAuth) method, and verify that they’re correct before continuing to process the request.

It’s often useful in the scenario where your API doesn’t have ‘real’ user accounts, but you want a quick and easy way to restrict access to it or protect it from prying eyes.

For APIs with ‘real’ user accounts and — in particular — hashed passwords, it’s not such a great fit. Comparing the password provided by a client against a (slow) hashed password is a deliberately costly operation, and when using HTTP basic authentication you need to do that check for every request. That will create a lot of extra work for your API server and add significant latency to responses.

#### Token authentication

The high-level idea behind token authentication (also sometimes known as bearer token authentication) works like this: 

1. The client sends a request to your API containing their credentials (typically username or email address, and password).

2. The API verifies that the credentials are correct, generates a bearer token which represents the user, and sends it back to the user. The token expires after a set period of time, after which the user will need to resubmit their credentials again to get a new token.

3. For subsequent requests to the API, the client includes the token in an Authorization header like this:

   ```
   Authorization: Bearer <token>
   ```

4. When your API receives this request, it checks that the token hasn’t expired and examines the token value to determine who the user is.

For APIs where user passwords are hashed (like ours), this approach is better than basic authentication because it means that the slow password check only has to be done periodically — either when creating a token for the first time or after a token has expired.

We can break down token authentication further into two sub-types: **stateful** and **stateless** token authentication. They are quite different in terms of their pros and cons.

##### Stateful token authentication

In a stateful token approach, the value of the token is a high-entropy cryptographically-secure random string. This token — or a fast hash of it — is stored server-side in a database, alongside the user ID and an expiry time for the token.

When the client sends back the token in subsequent requests, your application can look up the token in the database, check that it hasn’t expired, and retrieve the corresponding user ID to find out who the request is coming from.

The big advantage of this is that your API maintains control over the tokens — it’s straightforward to revoke tokens on a per-token or per-user basis by deleting them from the database or marking them as expired.

##### Stateless token authentication

In contrast, stateless tokens encode the user ID and expiry time in the token itself. The token is cryptographically signed to prevent tampering and (in some cases) encrypted to prevent the contents being read.

There are a few different technologies that you can use to create stateless tokens. Encoding the information in a JWT (JSON Web Token) is probably the most well-known approach.

The main selling point of using stateless tokens for authentication is that the work to encode and decode the token can be done in memory, and all the information required to identify the user is contained within the token itself. There’s no need to perform a database lookup to find out who a request is coming from.

The primary downside of stateless tokens is that they can’t easily be revoked once they are issued.

In an emergency, you could effectively revoke all tokens by changing the secret used for signing your tokens (forcing all users to re-authenticate), or another workaround is to maintain a blocklist of revoked tokens in a database (although that defeats the ‘stateless’ aspect of having stateless tokens).

**Note**: You should generally avoid storing additional information in a stateless token, such as a user’s activation status or permissions, and using that as the basis for authorization checks. During the lifetime of the token, the information encoded into it will potentially become stale and out-of-sync with the real data in your system — and relying on stale data for authorization checks can easily lead to unexpected behavior for users and various security issues.

Finally, with JWTs in particular, the fact that they’re highly configurable means that there are lots of things you can get wrong. The [Critical vulnerabilities in JSON Web Token libraries](https://auth0.com/blog/critical-vulnerabilities-in-json-web-token-libraries/) and [JWT Security Best Practices](https://curity.io/resources/learn/jwt-best-practices/) articles provide a good introduction to the type of things you need to be careful of here.

Because of these downsides, stateless tokens — and JWTs in particular — are generally not the best choice for managing authentication in most API applications.

But they can be very useful in a scenario where you need delegated authentication — where the application creating the authentication token is different to the application consuming it, and those applications don’t share any state (which means that using stateful tokens isn’t an option). For instance, if you’re building a system which has a microservice-style architecture behind the scenes, then a stateless token created by an ‘authentication’ service can subsequently be passed to other services to identify the user.

#### API-key authentication

The idea behind API-key authentication is that a user has a non-expiring secret ‘key’associated with their account. This key should be a high-entropy cryptographically-secure random string, and a fast hash of the key (SHA256 or SHA512) should be stored alongside the corresponding user ID in your database.

The user then passes their key with each request to your API in a header like this:

```
Authorization: Key <key>
```

On receiving it, your API can regenerate the fast hash of the key and use it to lookup the corresponding user ID from your database.

Conceptually, this isn’t a million miles away from the stateful token approach — the main difference is that the keys are permanent keys, rather than temporary tokens.

On one hand, this is nice for the client as they can use the same key for every request and they don’t need to write code to manage tokens or expiry. On the other hand, the user now has two long-lived secrets to manage which can potentially compromise their account: their password, and their API key.

Supporting API keys also adds additional complexity to your API application — you’ll need a way for users to regenerate their API key if they lose it or the key is compromised, and you may also wish to support multiple API keys for the same user, so they can use different keys for different purposes.

It’s also important to note that API keys themselves should only ever be communicated to users over a secure channel, and you should treat them with the same level of care that you would a user’s password.

#### OAuth 2.0 / OpenID Connect

Another option is to leverage OAuth 2.0 for authentication. With this approach, information about your users (and their passwords) is stored by a third-party identity provider like Google or Facebook rather than yourself.

The first thing to mention here is that OAuth 2.0 is not an authentication protocol, and you shouldn’t really use it for authenticating users. The [oauth.net](https://oauth.net/) website has a great article [explaining this](https://oauth.net/articles/authentication/), and I highly recommend reading it.

If you want to implement authentication checks against a third-party identity provider, you should use [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) (which is built directly on top of OAuth 2.0).

There’s a comprehensive overview of OpenID Connect here: [OpenID Connect explained](https://connect2id.com/learn/openid-connect).

Like all the other options we’ve looked at, there are pros and cons to using OpenID Connect.

The big plus is that you don’t need to persistently store user information or passwords yourself. The big downside is that it’s quite complex — although there are some helper packages like [coreos/go-oidc](https://github.com/coreos/go-oidc) which do a good job of masking that complexity and providing a simple interface for the OpenID Connect workflow that you can hook in to.

### Generating Authentication Tokens

```go
// File: internal/data/tokens.go 

package data 

...

const (  
  ScopeActivation     = "activation"   
  ScopeAuthentication = "authentication" // Include a new authentication scope.
) 

// Add struct tags to control how the struct appears when encoded to JSON.
type Token struct {   
  Plaintext string    `json:"token"`   
  Hash      []byte    `json:"-"`   
  UserID    int64     `json:"-"`   
  Expiry    time.Time `json:"expiry"`  
  Scope     string    `json:"-"`
}

...
```

#### Building the endpoint

```go
// File: cmd/api/tokens.go 

package main 

import ( 
  "errors"  
  "net/http" 
  "time"    
  
  "greenlight.alexedwards.net/internal/data"    
  "greenlight.alexedwards.net/internal/validator"
)

func (app *application) createAuthenticationTokenHandler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {   
  // Parse the email and password from the request body.
  var input struct {    
    Email    string `json:"email"`     
    Password string `json:"password"`   
  }
  
  err := app.readJSON(w, r, &input)  
  if err != nil {    
    app.badRequestResponse(w, r, err)   
    return    
  }    
  
  // Validate the email and password provided by the client.
  v := validator.New()  
  data.ValidateEmail(v, input.Email)   
  data.ValidatePasswordPlaintext(v, input.Password)   
  if !v.Valid() {     
    app.failedValidationResponse(w, r, v.Errors)    
    return   
  }    
  
  // Lookup the user record based on the email address. If no matching user was  
  // found, then we call the app.invalidCredentialsResponse() helper to send a 401  
  // Unauthorized response to the client (we will create this helper in a moment).
  user, err := app.models.Users.GetByEmail(input.Email)  
  if err != nil {     
    switch {      
    case errors.Is(err, data.ErrRecordNotFound):    
      app.invalidCredentialsResponse(w, r)    
    default:         
      app.serverErrorResponse(w, r, err)   
    }      
    return   
  }  
  
  // Check if the provided password matches the actual password for the user.
  match, err := user.Password.Matches(input.Password)   
  if err != nil {      
    app.serverErrorResponse(w, r, err)  
    return   
  }
  
  // If the passwords don't match, then we call the app.invalidCredentialsResponse()  
  // helper again and return.
  if !match {   
    app.invalidCredentialsResponse(w, r)    
    return   
  }   
  
  // Otherwise, if the password is correct, we generate a new token with a 24-hour  
  // expiry time and the scope 'authentication'.
  token, err := app.models.Tokens.New(user.ID, 24*time.Hour, data.ScopeAuthentication)
  if err != nil {   
    app.serverErrorResponse(w, r, err)  
    return  
  }   
  
  // Encode the token to JSON and send it in the response along with a 201 Created  
  // status code.
  err = app.writeJSON(w, http.StatusCreated, envelope{"authentication_token": token}, nil) 
  if err != nil {   
    app.serverErrorResponse(w, r, err) 
  }
}
```

```go
// File: cmd/api/errors.go 

package main 

...

func (app *application) invalidCredentialsResponse(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {  
  message := "invalid authentication credentials"  
  app.errorResponse(w, r, http.StatusUnauthorized, message) 
}
```

```go
// File: cmd/api/routes.go 

package main 

...

func (app *application) routes() http.Handler {   
  router := httprouter.New() 
  
  router.NotFound = http.HandlerFunc(app.notFoundResponse) 
  router.MethodNotAllowed = http.HandlerFunc(app.methodNotAllowedResponse)  
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/healthcheck", app.healthcheckHandler)  
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/movies", app.listMoviesHandler)     
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/movies", app.createMovieHandler)    
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/movies/:id", app.showMovieHandler)   
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPatch, "/v1/movies/:id", app.updateMovieHandler)  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodDelete, "/v1/movies/:id", app.deleteMovieHandler)  
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/users", app.registerUserHandler)    
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPut, "/v1/users/activated", app.activateUserHandler) 
  
  // Add the route for the POST /v1/tokens/authentication endpoint.
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/tokens/authentication", app.createAuthenticationTokenHandler)  
  
  return app.recoverPanic(app.rateLimit(router)) 
}
```

#### Additional Information

##### The Authorization header

Occasionally you might come across other APIs or tutorials where authentication tokens are sent back to the client in an `Authorization` header, rather than in the response body like we are in this chapter.

You can do that, and in most cases it will probably work fine. But it’s important to be conscious that you’re making a willful violation of the HTTP specifications: [Authorization](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Authorization) is a request header, not a response header.

### Authenticating Requests

Essentially, once a client has an authentication token we will expect them to include it with all subsequent requests in an `Authorization` header, like so:

```
Authorization: Bearer IEYZQUBEMPPAKPOAWTPV6YJ6RM
```

When we receive these requests, we’ll use a new authenticate() middleware method to execute the following logic: 

- If the authentication token is not valid, then we will send the client a `401 Unauthorized` response and an error message to let them know that their token is malformed or invalid.
- If the authentication token is valid, we will look up the user details and add their details to the request context.
- If no `Authorization` header was provided at all, then we will add the details for an anonymous user to the request context instead.

#### Creating the anonymous user

```go
// File: internal/data/users.go 

package data 

...

// Declare a new AnonymousUser variable.
var AnonymousUser = &User{} 

type User struct { 
  ID        int64     `json:"id"`  
  CreatedAt time.Time `json:"created_at"`   
  Name      string    `json:"name"`   
  Email     string    `json:"email"`  
  Password  password  `json:"-"`    
  Activated bool      `json:"activated"`  
  Version   int       `json:"-"`
}

// Check if a User instance is the AnonymousUser.
func (u *User) IsAnonymous() bool {  
  return u == AnonymousUser
}

...
```

For example:

```
data.AnonymousUser.IsAnonymous() // → Returns true 

otherUser := &data.User{} 
otherUser.IsAnonymous()          // → Returns false
```

#### Reading and writing to the request context

```go
// File: cmd/api/context.go 

package main 

import (  
  "context"    
  "net/http"
  
  "greenlight.alexedwards.net/internal/data" 
)

// Define a custom contextKey type, with the underlying type string.
type contextKey string 

// Convert the string "user" to a contextKey type and assign it to the userContextKey 
// constant. We'll use this constant as the key for getting and setting user  
// information in the request context.
const userContextKey = contextKey("user") 

// The contextSetUser() method returns a new copy of the request with the provided 
// User struct added to the context. Note that we use our userContextKey constant as 
// the key.
func (app *application) contextSetUser(r *http.Request, user *data.User) *http.Request { 
  ctx := context.WithValue(r.Context(), userContextKey, user)  
  return r.WithContext(ctx) 
}

// The contextGetUser() retrieves the User struct from the request context. The only 
// time that we'll use this helper is when we logically expect there to be User struct
// value in the context, and if it doesn't exist it will firmly be an 'unexpected' 
// error. As we discussed earlier in the book, it's OK to panic in those circumstances.
func (app *application) contextGetUser(r *http.Request) *data.User {
  user, ok := r.Context().Value(userContextKey).(*data.User)     
  if !ok {    
    panic("missing user value in request context")  
  }
  
  return user 
}
```

#### Creating the authentication middleware

```go
// File: cmd/api/middleware.go 

package main 

import ( 
  "errors" // New import  
  "fmt"  
  "net"   
  "net/http"  
  "strings" // New import    
  "sync"  
  "time"   
  
  "greenlight.alexedwards.net/internal/data"      // New import     
  "greenlight.alexedwards.net/internal/validator" // New import   
  
  "golang.org/x/time/rate" 
)

...

func (app *application) authenticate(next http.Handler) http.Handler { 
  return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {   
    // Add the "Vary: Authorization" header to the response. This indicates to any  
    // caches that the response may vary based on the value of the Authorization   
    // header in the request.
    w.Header().Add("Vary", "Authorization")  
    
    // Retrieve the value of the Authorization header from the request. This will   
    // return the empty string "" if there is no such header found.
    authorizationHeader := r.Header.Get("Authorization")    
    
    // If there is no Authorization header found, use the contextSetUser() helper  
    // that we just made to add the AnonymousUser to the request context. Then we 
    // call the next handler in the chain and return without executing any of the  
    // code below.
    if authorizationHeader == "" {    
      r = app.contextSetUser(r, data.AnonymousUser)  
      next.ServeHTTP(w, r)    
      return      
    }       
    
    // Otherwise, we expect the value of the Authorization header to be in the format 
    // "Bearer <token>". We try to split this into its constituent parts, and if the  
    // header isn't in the expected format we return a 401 Unauthorized response   
    // using the invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse() helper (which we will create 
    // in a moment).
    headerParts := strings.Split(authorizationHeader, " ")   
    if len(headerParts) != 2 || headerParts[0] != "Bearer" {   
      app.invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse(w, r)  
      return       
    }
    
    // Extract the actual authentication token from the header parts.
    token := headerParts[1]     
    
    // Validate the token to make sure it is in a sensible format.
    v := validator.New()   
    
    // If the token isn't valid, use the invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse()   
    // helper to send a response, rather than the failedValidationResponse() helper 
    // that we'd normally use.
    if data.ValidateTokenPlaintext(v, token); !v.Valid() { 
      app.invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse(w, r)     
      return     
    }      
    
    // Retrieve the details of the user associated with the authentication token, 
    // again calling the invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse() helper if no        
    // matching record was found. IMPORTANT: Notice that we are using      
    // ScopeAuthentication as the first parameter here.
    user, err := app.models.Users.GetForToken(data.ScopeAuthentication, token)    
    if err != nil {       
      switch {        
      case errors.Is(err, data.ErrRecordNotFound):  
        app.invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse(w, r)     
      default:             
        app.serverErrorResponse(w, r, err)       
      }          
      
      return   
    }     
    
    // Call the contextSetUser() helper to add the user information to the request  
    // context.
    r = app.contextSetUser(r, user)    
    
    // Call the next handler in the chain.
    next.ServeHTTP(w, r)  
  }) 
}
```

```go
// File: cmd/api/errors.go 

package main 

...

func (app *application) invalidAuthenticationTokenResponse(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {  
  w.Header().Set("WWW-Authenticate", "Bearer")  
  
  message := "invalid or missing authentication token"   
  app.errorResponse(w, r, http.StatusUnauthorized, message)
}
```

B: We’re including a `WWW-Authenticate: Bearer` header here to help inform or remind the client that we expect them to authenticate using a bearer token.

```go
// File: cmd/api/routes.go 

package main 

...

func (app *application) routes() http.Handler {  
  router := httprouter.New()  
  
  router.NotFound = http.HandlerFunc(app.notFoundResponse)   
  router.MethodNotAllowed = http.HandlerFunc(app.methodNotAllowedResponse)  
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/healthcheck", app.healthcheckHandler)  
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/movies", app.listMoviesHandler)    
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/movies", app.createMovieHandler)  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodGet, "/v1/movies/:id", app.showMovieHandler) 
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPatch, "/v1/movies/:id", app.updateMovieHandler) 
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodDelete, "/v1/movies/:id", app.deleteMovieHandler) 
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/users", app.registerUserHandler)    
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPut, "/v1/users/activated", app.activateUserHandler)
  
  router.HandlerFunc(http.MethodPost, "/v1/tokens/authentication", app.createAuthenticationTokenHandler)   
  
  // Use the authenticate() middleware on all requests.
  return app.recoverPanic(app.rateLimit(app.authenticate(router)))
}
```

#### Demonstration

Let’s test this out by first making a request with no `Authorization` header. Behind the scenes, our `authenticate()` middleware will add the `AnonymousUser` to the request context and the request should complete successfully. Like so:

```
$ curl localhost:4000/v1/healthcheck                                    
{
	"status": "available",
	"system_info": {
		"environment": "development",
		"version": "1.0.0"
	}
}
```

Then let’s try the same thing but with a valid authentication token in the `Authorization` header.

```
$ curl -d '{"email": "dave@example.com", "password": "pa55word"}' localhost:4000/v1/tokens/authentication
{
	"authentication_token": {
		"token": "3O5BGOUYVQJOJOYZSCMMFBMRIY",
		"expiry": "2024-12-04T13:49:18.347673+08:00"
	}
}
```

```
$ curl -H "Authorization: Bearer 3O5BGOUYVQJOJOYZSCMMFBMRIY" localhost:4000/v1/healthcheck
{
	"status": "available",
	"system_info": {
		"environment": "development",
		"version": "1.0.0"
	}
}
```

```
$ curl -i -H "Authorization: Bearer XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX" localhost:4000/v1/healthcheck
HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
Content-Type: application/json
Vary: Authorization
Www-Authenticate: Bearer
Date: Tue, 03 Dec 2024 05:52:44 GMT
Content-Length: 56

{
	"error": "invalid or missing authentication token"
}
```

