# Prototype methods, objects without **proto**

In the first chapter of this section, we mentioned that there are modern methods to setup a prototype.

Setting or reading the prototype with `obj.__proto__` is considered outdated and somewhat deprecated (moved to the so-called "Annex B" of the JavaScript standard, meant for browsers only).

The modern methods to get/set a prototype are:

- [Object.getPrototypeOf(obj)](mdn:js/Object/getPrototypeOf) -- returns the `[[Prototype]]` of `obj`.
- [Object.setPrototypeOf(obj, proto)](mdn:js/Object/setPrototypeOf) -- sets the `[[Prototype]]` of `obj` to `proto`.

The only usage of `__proto__`, that's not frowned upon, is as a property when creating a new object: `{ __proto__: ... }`.

Although, there's a special method for this too:

- [Object.create(proto[, descriptors])](mdn:js/Object/create) -- creates an empty object with given `proto` as `[[Prototype]]` and optional property descriptors.

For instance:

```js run
let animal = {
  eats: true,
};

// create a new object with animal as a prototype
let rabbit = Object.create(animal); // same as {__proto__: animal}

alert(rabbit.eats); // true

alert(Object.getPrototypeOf(rabbit) === animal); // true

Object.setPrototypeOf(rabbit, {}); // change the prototype of rabbit to {}
```

The `Object.create` method is a bit more powerful, as it has an optional second argument: property descriptors.

We can provide additional properties to the new object there, like this:

```js run
let animal = {
  eats: true,
};

let rabbit = Object.create(animal, {
  jumps: {
    value: true,
  },
});

alert(rabbit.jumps); // true
```

We can use `Object.create` to perform an object cloning more powerful than copying properties in `for..in`:

```js
let clone = Object.create(Object.getPrototypeOf(obj), Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptors(obj));
```

This call makes a truly exact copy of `obj`, including all properties: enumerable and non-enumerable, data properties and setters/getters -- everything, and with the right `[[Prototype]]`.

## Brief history

There're so many ways to manage `[[Prototype]]`. How did that happen? Why?

That's for historical reasons.

The prototypal inheritance was in the language since its dawn, but the ways to manage it evolved over time.

- The `prototype` property of a constructor function has worked since very ancient times. It's the oldest way to create objects with a given prototype.
- Later, in the year 2012, `Object.create` appeared in the standard. It gave the ability to create objects with a given prototype, but did not provide the ability to get/set it. Some browsers implemented the non-standard `__proto__` accessor that allowed the user to get/set a prototype at any time, to give more flexibility to developers.
- Later, in the year 2015, `Object.setPrototypeOf` and `Object.getPrototypeOf` were added to the standard, to perform the same functionality as `__proto__`. As `__proto__` was de-facto implemented everywhere, it was kind-of deprecated and made its way to the Annex B of the standard, that is: optional for non-browser environments.
- Later, in the year 2022, it was officially allowed to use `__proto__` in object literals `{...}` (moved out of Annex B), but not as a getter/setter `obj.__proto__` (still in Annex B).

Why was `__proto__` replaced by the functions `getPrototypeOf/setPrototypeOf`?

Why was `__proto__` partially rehabilitated and its usage allowed in `{...}`, but not as a getter/setter?

That's an interesting question, requiring us to understand why `__proto__` is bad.

Technically, we can get/set `[[Prototype]]` at any time. But usually we only set it once at the object creation time and don't modify it anymore: `rabbit` inherits from `animal`, and that is not going to change.

And JavaScript engines are highly optimized for this. Changing a prototype "on-the-fly" with `Object.setPrototypeOf` or `obj.__proto__=` is a very slow operation as it breaks internal optimizations for object property access operations. So avoid it unless you know what you're doing, or JavaScript speed totally doesn't matter for you.
