## Working with Docker Images

### Anatomy of a Dockerfile

```dockerfile
FROM docker.io/node:18.13.0

ARG email="anna@example.com"
LABEL "maintainer"=$email
LABEL "rating"="Five Stars" "class"="First Class"

USER root

ENV AP=/data/app
ENV SCPATH=/etc/supervisor/conf.d

RUN apt-get -y update

# The daemons
RUN apt-get -y install supervisor
RUN mkdir -p /var/log/supervisor

# Supervisor Configuration
COPY ./supervisord/conf.d/* $SCPATH/

# Application Code
COPY *.js* $AP/

WORKDIR $AP

RUN npm install

CMD ["supervisord", "-n"]
```

The `ARG` parameter provides a way for you to set variables and their default values, which are only available during the image build process:

```dockerfile
ARG email="anna@example.com"
```

Applying labels to images and containers allows you to add metadata via key/value pairs that can later be used to search for and identify Docker images and containers. You can see the labels applied to any image using the `docker image inspect` command. For the maintainer label, we are leveraging the value of the email build argument that was defined in the previous line of the Dockerfile. This means that this label can be changed anytime we build this image:

```
LABEL "maintainer"=$email 
LABEL "rating"="Five Stars" "class"="First Class"
```

By default, Docker runs all processes as root within the container, but you can use the USER instruction to change this:

```
USER root
```

**Caution**: Even though containers provide some isolation from the underlying operating system, they still run on the host kernel. Due to potential security risks, production containers should almost always be run in the context of an unprivileged user.

Unlike the `ARG` instruction, the `ENV` instruction allows you to set shell variables that can be used by your running application for configuration, in addition to being available during the build process.

```
ENV AP=/data/app
ENV SCPATH=/etc/supervisor/conf.d
```

In the following code, you’ll use a collection of `RUN` instructions to start and create the required file structure that you need, and install some required software dependencies:

```dockerfile
RUN apt-get -y update  

# The daemons 
RUN apt-get -y install supervisor 
RUN mkdir -p /var/log/supervisor
```

**Warning**: While we’re demonstrating it here for simplicity, it is not recommended that you run commands like `apt-get -y update` or `dnf -y update` in your application’s Dockerfile. This is because it requires crawling the repository index each time you run a build, which means that your build is not guaranteed to be repeatable since package versions might change between builds. Instead, consider basing your application image on another image that already has these updates applied to it and where the versions are in a known state. It will be faster and more repeatable.

The `COPY` instruction is used to copy files from the local filesystem into your image. Most often this will include your application code and any required support files. Because `COPY` copies the files into the image, you no longer need access to the local filesystem to access them once the image is built. You’ll also start to use the build variables you defined in the previous section to save you a bit of work and help protect you from typos:

```dockerfile
# Supervisor Configuration 
COPY ./supervisord/conf.d/* $SCPATH/  

# Application Code 
COPY *.js* $AP/
```

With the `WORKDIR` instruction, you change the working directory in the image for the remaining build instructions and the default process that launches with any resulting containers:

```dockerfile
WORKDIR $AP  

RUN npm install
```

And finally, you end with the `CMD` instruction, which defines the command that launches the process that you want to run within the container:

```dockerfile
CMD ["supervisord", "-n"]
```

### Building an Image

```
$ git clone https://github.com/spkane/docker-node-hello.git

$ cd docker-node-hello
```

```
$ docker build -t example/docker-node-hello:latest .
```

### Running Your Image

```
$ docker container run --rm -d -p 8080:8080 example/docker-node-hello:latest
```

This command tells Docker to create a running container in the background from the image with the `example/docker-node-hello:latest` tag, and then map port 8080 in the container to port 8080 on the Docker host. By typing `docker container ls`, you can see the container is running in the background.

#### Build Arguments

You can inspect the image that we built:

```
$ docker image inspect example/docker-node-hello:latest
```

If we wanted to change the `maintainer` label, we could simply rerun the build and provide a new value for the email `ARG` via the `--build-arg` command-line argument, like so:

```
$ docker build --build-arg email=me@example.com \ 
		-t example/docker-node-hello:latest .
```

#### Environment Variables as Configuration

If you read the `index.js` file, you will notice that part of the file refers to the variable `$WHO`

```js
// index.js

var DEFAULT_WHO = "World"; 
var WHO = process.env.WHO || DEFAULT_WHO;  

app.get('/', function (req, res) {  
  res.send('Hello ' + WHO + '. Wish you were here.\n'); 
});
```

Stop the running container:

```
$ docker container ls

$ docker container stop b7145e06083f
```

**Note**: Using `docker container ls` is functionally equivalent to using `docker container list`, `docker container ps`, or `docker ps`. Using `docker container stop` is also functionally equivalent to using `docker stop`.

You can then restart the container after adding a single instance of the `--env` argument to the previous `docker container run` command:

```
$ docker container run --rm -d \
		--publish mode=ingress,published=8080,target=8080 \
    --env WHO="Sean" \
    example/docker-node-hello:latest
```

You could shorten the preceding `docker` command to the following if you wanted:

```
$ docker container run --rm -d -p 8080:8080 \
		-e WHO="Sean" \
    example/docker-node-hello:latest
```

**Note**: `docker container run` and `docker run` are exactly the same.  `docker container stop` and `docker stop` are also the same.

### Custom Base Images

