# Data types

There are **eight** basic data types in JavaScript.

## Number

The *number* type represents both integer and floating-point numbers.

Besides regular numbers, there are so-called "special numeric values" which also belong to this data type: `Infinity`, `-Infinity` and `NaN`.

`NaN` is sticky. Any further mathematical operation on `NaN` returns `NaN`:

```js run
alert( NaN + 1 ); // NaN
alert( 3 * NaN ); // NaN
alert( "not a number" / 2 - 1 ); // NaN
```

But there's only one exception to that: `NaN ** 0` is `1`

Doing maths is "safe" in JavaScript. We can do anything: divide by zero, treat non-numeric strings as numbers, etc. The script will never stop with a fatal error ("die"). At worst, we'll get `NaN` as the result.

## BigInt

In JavaScript, the "number" type cannot safely represent integer values larger than <code>(2<sup>53</sup>-1)</code> (that's `9007199254740991`), or less than <code>-(2<sup>53</sup>-1)</code> for negatives.

To be really precise, the "number" type can store larger integers (up to <code>1.7976931348623157 * 10<sup>308</sup></code>), but outside of the safe integer range <code>±(2<sup>53</sup>-1)</code> there'll be a precision error, because not all digits fit into the fixed 64-bit storage. So an "approximate" value may be stored.

For example, these two numbers (right above the safe range) are the same:

```js
console.log(9007199254740991 + 1); // 9007199254740992
console.log(9007199254740991 + 2); // 9007199254740992
```

So to say, all odd integers greater than <code>(2<sup>53</sup>-1)</code> can't be stored at all in the "number" type.

`BigInt` type was recently added to the language to represent integers of arbitrary length.

A `BigInt` value is created by appending `n` to the end of an integer:

```js
// the "n" at the end means it's a BigInt
const bigInt = 1234567890123456789012345678901234567890n;
```

## String

A string in JavaScript must be surrounded by quotes. In JavaScript, there are 3 types of quotes.

1. Double quotes: `"Hello"`.
2. Single quotes: `'Hello'`.
3. Backticks: <code>&#96;Hello&#96;</code>.

## Boolean (logical type)

The boolean type has only two values: `true` and `false`.

## The "null" value

The special `null` value does not belong to any of the types described above.

It forms a separate type of its own which contains only the `null` value:

```js
let age = null;
```

In JavaScript, `null` is not a "reference to a non-existing object" or a "null pointer" like in some other languages.

It's just a special value which represents "nothing", "empty" or "value unknown".

The code above states that `age` is unknown.

## The "undefined" value

The special value `undefined` also stands apart. It makes a type of its own, just like `null`.

The meaning of `undefined` is "value is not assigned".

If a variable is declared, but not assigned, then its value is `undefined`:

```js run
let age;

alert(age); // shows "undefined"
```

Technically, it is possible to explicitly assign `undefined` to a variable:

```js run
let age = 100;

// change the value to undefined
age = undefined;

alert(age); // "undefined"
```

...But we don't recommend doing that. Normally, one uses `null` to assign an "empty" or "unknown" value to a variable, while `undefined` is reserved as a default initial value for unassigned things.

## Objects and Symbols

The `object` type is special.

All other types are called "primitive" because their values can contain only a single thing (be it a string or a number or whatever). In contrast, objects are used to store collections of data and more complex entities.

The `symbol` type is used to create unique identifiers for objects.

## The typeof operator

A call to `typeof x` returns a string with the type name:

```js
typeof undefined // "undefined"

typeof 0 // "number"

typeof 10n // "bigint"

typeof true // "boolean"

typeof "foo" // "string"

typeof Symbol("id") // "symbol"

typeof Math // "object"  (1)

typeof null // "object"  (2)

typeof alert // "function"  (3)
```

The last three lines may need additional explanation:

1. `Math` is a built-in object that provides mathematical operations.
2. The result of `typeof null` is `"object"`. That's an officially recognized error in `typeof`, coming from very early days of JavaScript and kept for compatibility. Definitely, `null` is not an object. It is a special value with a separate type of its own. The behavior of `typeof` is wrong here.
3. The result of `typeof alert` is `"function"`, because `alert` is a function. There's no special "function" type in JavaScript. Functions belong to the object type. But `typeof` treats them differently, returning `"function"`. That also comes from the early days of JavaScript. Technically, such behavior isn't correct, but can be convenient in practice.


You may also come across another syntax: `typeof(x)`. It's the same as `typeof x`.

To put it clear: `typeof` is an operator, not a function. The parentheses here aren't a part of `typeof`. It's the kind of parentheses used for mathematical grouping.

Usually, such parentheses contain a mathematical expression, such as `(2 + 2)`, but here they contain only one argument `(x)`. Syntactically, they allow to avoid a space between the `typeof` operator and its argument, and some people like it.

Some people prefer `typeof(x)`, although the `typeof x` syntax is much more common.
