# Basic operators

## Terms: "operand", "unary", "binary"

Before we move on, let's grasp some common terminology.

- _An operand_ -- is what operators are applied to. For instance, in the multiplication of `5 * 2` there are two operands: the left operand is `5` and the right operand is `2`. Sometimes, people call these "arguments" instead of "operands".
- An operator is _unary_ if it has a single operand. For example, the unary negation `-` reverses the sign of a number.
- An operator is _binary_ if it has two operands.

## String concatenation with binary +

Usually, the plus operator `+` sums numbers.

But, if the binary `+` is applied to strings, it merges (concatenates) them:

```js
let s = "my" + "string";
alert(s); // mystring
```

Note that if any of the operands is a string, then the other one is converted to a string too.

For example:

```js run
alert("1" + 2); // "12"
alert(2 + "1"); // "21"
```

See, it doesn't matter whether the first operand is a string or the second one.

Here's a more complex example:

```js run
alert(2 + 2 + "1"); // "41" and not "221"
```

```js run
alert("1" + 2 + 2); // "122" and not "14"
```

The binary `+` is the only operator that supports strings in such a way. Other arithmetic operators work only with numbers and always convert their operands to numbers.

Here's the demo for subtraction and division:

```js run
alert(6 - "2"); // 4, converts '2' to a number
alert("6" / "2"); // 3, converts both operands to numbers
```

## Numeric conversion, unary +

The plus `+` exists in two forms: the binary form that we used above and the unary form.

The unary plus or, in other words, the plus operator `+` applied to a single value, doesn't do anything to numbers. But if the operand is not a number, the unary plus converts it into a number.

For example:

```js run
// No effect on numbers
let x = 1;
alert(+x); // 1

let y = -2;
alert(+y); // -2

// Converts non-numbers
alert(+true); // 1
alert(+""); // 0
```

It actually does the same thing as `Number(...)`, but is shorter.

```js run
let apples = "2";
let oranges = "3";

// both values converted to numbers before the binary plus
alert(+apples + +oranges); // 5

// the longer variant
alert(Number(apples) + Number(oranges)); // 5
```

## Operator precedence

Here's an extract from the [precedence table](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Operator_Precedence):

| Precedence | Name           | Sign |
| ---------- | -------------- | ---- |
| ...        | ...            | ...  |
| 14         | unary plus     | `+`  |
| 14         | unary negation | `-`  |
| 13         | exponentiation | `**` |
| 12         | multiplication | `*`  |
| 12         | division       | `/`  |
| 11         | addition       | `+`  |
| 11         | subtraction    | `-`  |
| ...        | ...            | ...  |
| 2          | assignment     | `=`  |
| ...        | ...            | ...  |

## Assignment

Let's note that an assignment `=` is also an operator. It is listed in the precedence table with the very low priority of `2`.

### Assignment = returns a value

The fact of `=` being an operator, not a "magical" language construct has an interesting implication.

All operators in JavaScript return a value. That's obvious for `+` and `-`, but also true for `=`.

The call `x = value` writes the `value` into `x` _and then returns it_.

Here's a demo that uses an assignment as part of a more complex expression:

```js run
let a = 1;
let b = 2;

let c = 3 - (a = b + 1);

alert(a); // 3
alert(c); // 0
```

### Chaining assignments

Another interesting feature is the ability to chain assignments:

```js run
let a, b, c;

a = b = c = 2 + 2;

alert(a); // 4
alert(b); // 4
alert(c); // 4
```

Chained assignments evaluate from right to left. First, the rightmost expression `2 + 2` is evaluated and then assigned to the variables on the left: `c`, `b` and `a`. At the end, all the variables share a single value.

Once again, for the purposes of readability it's better to split such code into few lines:

```js
c = 2 + 2;
b = c;
a = c;
```

## Modify-in-place

We often need to apply an operator to a variable and store the new result in that same variable.

For example:

```js
let n = 2;
n = n + 5;
n = n * 2;
```

This notation can be shortened using the operators `+=` and `*=`:

```js run
let n = 2;
n += 5; // now n = 7 (same as n = n + 5)
n *= 2; // now n = 14 (same as n = n * 2)

alert(n); // 14
```

Short "modify-and-assign" operators exist for all arithmetical and bitwise operators: `/=`, `-=`, etc.

Such operators have the same precedence as a normal assignment, so they run after most other calculations:

```js run
let n = 2;

n *= 3 + 5; // right part evaluated first, same as n *= 8

alert(n); // 16
```

## Increment/decrement

- **Increment** `++` increases a variable by 1:

  ```js run no-beautify
  let counter = 2;
  counter++; // works the same as counter = counter + 1, but is shorter
  alert(counter); // 3
  ```

- **Decrement** `--` decreases a variable by 1:

  ```js run no-beautify
  let counter = 2;
  counter--; // works the same as counter = counter - 1, but is shorter
  alert(counter); // 1
  ```

Increment/decrement can only be applied to variables. Trying to use it on a value like `5++` will give an error.

The operators `++` and `--` can be placed either before or after a variable.

- When the operator goes after the variable, it is in "postfix form": `counter++`.
- The "prefix form" is when the operator goes before the variable: `++counter`.

Both of these statements do the same thing: increase `counter` by `1`.

Is there any difference? Yes, but we can only see it if we use the returned value of `++/--`.

Let's clarify. As we know, all operators return a value. Increment/decrement is no exception. The prefix form returns the new value while the postfix form returns the old value (prior to increment/decrement).

To see the difference, here's an example:

```js run
let counter = 1;
let a = ++counter; // (*)

alert(a); // 2
```

In the line `(*)`, the _prefix_ form `++counter` increments `counter` and returns the new value, `2`. So, the `alert` shows `2`.

Now, let's use the postfix form:

```js run
let counter = 1;
let a = counter++; // (*) changed ++counter to counter++

alert(a); // 1
```

In the line `(*)`, the _postfix_ form `counter++` also increments `counter` but returns the _old_ value (prior to increment). So, the `alert` shows `1`.

To summarize:

- If the result of increment/decrement is not used, there is no difference in which form to use:

  ```js run
  let counter = 0;
  counter++;
  ++counter;
  alert(counter); // 2, the lines above did the same
  ```

- If we'd like to increase a value _and_ immediately use the result of the operator, we need the prefix form:

  ```js run
  let counter = 0;
  alert(++counter); // 1
  ```

- If we'd like to increment a value but use its previous value, we need the postfix form:

  ```js run
  let counter = 0;
  alert(counter++); // 0
  ```

The operators `++/--` can be used inside expressions as well. Their precedence is higher than most other arithmetical operations.

For instance:

```js run
let counter = 1;
alert(2 * ++counter); // 4
```

Compare with:

```js run
let counter = 1;
alert(2 * counter++); // 2, because counter++ returns the "old" value
```

## Comma

The comma operator `,` is one of the rarest and most unusual operators. Sometimes, it's used to write shorter code, so we need to know it in order to understand what's going on.

The comma operator allows us to evaluate several expressions, dividing them with a comma `,`. Each of them is evaluated but only the result of the last one is returned.

For example:

```js run
let a = (1 + 2, 3 + 4);

alert(a); // 7 (the result of 3 + 4)
```

Here, the first expression `1 + 2` is evaluated and its result is thrown away. Then, `3 + 4` is evaluated and returned as the result.

Please note that the comma operator has very low precedence, lower than `=`, so parentheses are important in the example above.

Without them: `a = 1 + 2, 3 + 4` evaluates `+` first, summing the numbers into `a = 3, 7`, then the assignment operator `=` assigns `a = 3`, and the rest is ignored. It's like `(a = 1 + 2), 3 + 4`.

Why do we need an operator that throws away everything except the last expression?

Sometimes, people use it in more complex constructs to put several actions in one line.

For example:

```js
// three operations in one line
for (a = 1, b = 3, c = a * b; a < 10; a++) {
 ...
}
```

Such tricks are used in many JavaScript frameworks. That's why we're mentioning them. But usually they don't improve code readability so we should think well before using them.
