# Logical operators

## OR "||" finds the first truthy value

Given multiple OR'ed values:

```js
result = value1 || value2 || value3;
```

The OR `||` operator does the following:

- Evaluates operands from left to right.
- For each operand, converts it to boolean. If the result is `true`, stops and returns the original value of that operand.
- If all operands have been evaluated (i.e. all were `false`), returns the last operand.

A value is returned in its original form, without the conversion.

In other words, a chain of OR `||` returns the first truthy value or the last one if no truthy value is found.

```js run
alert(1 || 0); // 1 (1 is truthy)

alert(null || 1); // 1 (1 is the first truthy value)
alert(null || 0 || 1); // 1 (the first truthy value)

alert(undefined || null || 0); // 0 (all falsy, returns the last value)
```

This leads to some interesting usage compared to a "pure, classical, boolean-only OR".

1. **Getting the first truthy value from a list of variables or expressions.**

   For instance, we have `firstName`, `lastName` and `nickName` variables, all optional (i.e. can be undefined or have falsy values).

   Let's use OR `||` to choose the one that has the data and show it (or `"Anonymous"` if nothing set):

   ```js run
   let firstName = "";
   let lastName = "";
   let nickName = "SuperCoder";

   alert(firstName || lastName || nickName || "Anonymous"); // SuperCoder
   ```

   If all variables were falsy, `"Anonymous"` would show up.

2. **Short-circuit evaluation.**

   Another feature of OR `||` operator is the so-called "short-circuit" evaluation.

   It means that `||` processes its arguments until the first truthy value is reached, and then the value is returned immediately, without even touching the other argument.

   The importance of this feature becomes obvious if an operand isn't just a value, but an expression with a side effect, such as a variable assignment or a function call.

   In the example below, only the second message is printed:

   ```js run no-beautify
   true || alert("not printed");
   false || alert("printed");
   ```

   In the first line, the OR `||` operator stops the evaluation immediately upon seeing `true`, so the `alert` isn't run.

   Sometimes, people use this feature to execute commands only if the condition on the left part is falsy.

## AND "&&" finds the first falsy value

Given multiple AND'ed values:

```js
result = value1 && value2 && value3;
```

The AND `&&` operator does the following:

- Evaluates operands from left to right.
- For each operand, converts it to a boolean. If the result is `false`, stops and returns the original value of that operand.
- If all operands have been evaluated (i.e. all were truthy), returns the last operand.

In other words, AND returns the first falsy value or the last value if none were found.

The rules above are similar to OR. The difference is that AND returns the first _falsy_ value while OR returns the first _truthy_ one.

Examples:

```js run
// if the first operand is truthy,
// AND returns the second operand:
alert(1 && 0); // 0
alert(1 && 5); // 5

// if the first operand is falsy,
// AND returns it. The second operand is ignored
alert(null && 5); // null
alert(0 && "no matter what"); // 0
```

We can also pass several values in a row. See how the first falsy one is returned:

```js run
alert(1 && 2 && null && 3); // null
```

When all values are truthy, the last value is returned:

```js run
alert(1 && 2 && 3); // 3, the last one
```

The precedence of AND `&&` operator is higher than OR `||`. So the code `a && b || c && d` is essentially the same as if the `&&` expressions were in parentheses: `(a && b) || (c && d)`.

Sometimes, people use the AND `&&` operator as a "shorter way to write `if`".

For instance:

```js run
let x = 1;

x > 0 && alert("Greater than zero!");
```

The action in the right part of `&&` would execute only if the evaluation reaches it. That is, only if `(x > 0)` is true.

So we basically have an analogue for:

```js run
let x = 1;

if (x > 0) alert("Greater than zero!");
```

## ! (NOT)

A double NOT `!!` is sometimes used for converting a value to boolean type:

```js run
alert(!!"non-empty string"); // true
alert(!!null); // false
```

That is, the first NOT converts the value to boolean and returns the inverse, and the second NOT inverses it again. In the end, we have a plain value-to-boolean conversion.

There's a little more verbose way to do the same thing -- a built-in `Boolean` function:

```js run
alert(Boolean("non-empty string")); // true
alert(Boolean(null)); // false
```

The precedence of NOT `!` is the highest of all logical operators, so it always executes first, before `&&` or `||`.
