# Function expressions

## Function is a value

Let's reiterate: no matter how the function is created, a function is a value. We can even print out that value using `alert`:

```js run
function sayHi() {
  alert("Hello");
}

alert(sayHi); // shows the function code
```

We can copy a function to another variable:

```js run no-beautify
function sayHi() {
  // (1) create
  alert("Hello");
}

let func = sayHi; // (2) copy

func(); // Hello     // (3) run the copy (it works)!
sayHi(); // Hello    //     this still works too (why wouldn't it)
```

We could also have used a Function Expression to declare `sayHi`, in the first line:

```js
let sayHi = function () {
  // (1) create
  alert("Hello");
};

let func = sayHi;
// ...
```

You might wonder, why do Function Expressions have a semicolon `;` at the end, but Function Declarations do not:

```js
function sayHi() {
  // ...
}

let sayHi = function () {
  // ...
};
```

The answer is simple: a Function Expression is created here as `function(…) {…}` inside the assignment statement: `let sayHi = …;`. The semicolon `;` is recommended at the end of the statement, it's not a part of the function syntax.

The semicolon would be there for a simpler assignment, such as `let sayHi = 5;`, and it's also there for a function assignment.

## Callback functions

The function should ask the `question` and, depending on the user's answer, call `yes()` or `no()`:

```js run
function ask(question, yes, no) {
  if (confirm(question)) yes();
  else no();
}

function showOk() {
  alert("You agreed.");
}

function showCancel() {
  alert("You canceled the execution.");
}

// usage: functions showOk, showCancel are passed as arguments to ask
ask("Do you agree?", showOk, showCancel);
```

**The arguments `showOk` and `showCancel` of `ask` are called _callback functions_ or just _callbacks_.**

The idea is that we pass a function and expect it to be "called back" later if necessary. In our case, `showOk` becomes the callback for "yes" answer, and `showCancel` for "no" answer.

We can use Function Expressions to write an equivalent, shorter function:

```js run no-beautify
function ask(question, yes, no) {
  if (confirm(question)) yes();
  else no();
}

ask(
  "Do you agree?",
  function () {
    alert("You agreed.");
  },
  function () {
    alert("You canceled the execution.");
  }
);
```

Here, functions are declared right inside the `ask(...)` call. They have no name, and so are called _anonymous_. Such functions are not accessible outside of `ask` (because they are not assigned to variables), but that's just what we want here.

## Function Expression vs Function Declaration

Let's formulate the key differences between Function Declarations and Expressions.

First, the syntax: how to differentiate between them in the code.

- _Function Declaration:_ a function, declared as a separate statement, in the main code flow:

  ```js
  // Function Declaration
  function sum(a, b) {
    return a + b;
  }
  ```

- _Function Expression:_ a function, created inside an expression or inside another syntax construct. Here, the function is created on the right side of the "assignment expression" `=`:

  ```js
  // Function Expression
  let sum = function (a, b) {
    return a + b;
  };
  ```

The more subtle difference is _when_ a function is created by the JavaScript engine.

**A Function Expression is created when the execution reaches it and is usable only from that moment.**

Once the execution flow passes to the right side of the assignment `let sum = function…` -- here we go, the function is created and can be used (assigned, called, etc. ) from now on.

Function Declarations are different.

**A Function Declaration can be called earlier than it is defined.**

For example, a global Function Declaration is visible in the whole script, no matter where it is.

That's due to internal algorithms. When JavaScript prepares to run the script, it first looks for global Function Declarations in it and creates the functions. We can think of it as an "initialization stage".

And after all Function Declarations are processed, the code is executed. So it has access to these functions.

For example, this works:

```js run 
sayHi("John"); // Hello, John

function sayHi(name) {
  alert(`Hello, ${name}`);
}
```

The Function Declaration `sayHi` is created when JavaScript is preparing to start the script and is visible everywhere in it.

...If it were a Function Expression, then it wouldn't work:

```js run refresh untrusted
sayHi("John"); // error!

let sayHi = function (name) {
  // (*) no magic any more
  alert(`Hello, ${name}`);
};
```

Function Expressions are created when the execution reaches them. That would happen only in the line `(*)`. Too late.

Another special feature of Function Declarations is their block scope.

**In strict mode, when a Function Declaration is within a code block, it's visible everywhere inside that block. But not outside of it.**

For instance, let's imagine that we need to declare a function `welcome()` depending on the `age` variable that we get during runtime. And then we plan to use it some time later.

If we use Function Declaration, it won't work as intended:

```js run
let age = prompt("What is your age?", 18);

// conditionally declare a function
if (age < 18) {
  function welcome() {
    alert("Hello!");
  }
} else {
  function welcome() {
    alert("Greetings!");
  }
}

// ...use it later
welcome(); // Error: welcome is not defined
```

That's because a Function Declaration is only visible inside the code block in which it resides.

What can we do to make `welcome` visible outside of `if`?

The correct approach would be to use a Function Expression and assign `welcome` to the variable that is declared outside of `if` and has the proper visibility.

This code works as intended:

```js run
let age = prompt("What is your age?", 18);

let welcome;

if (age < 18) {
  welcome = function () {
    alert("Hello!");
  };
} else {
  welcome = function () {
    alert("Greetings!");
  };
}

welcome(); // ok now
```

Or we could simplify it even further using a question mark operator `?`:

```js run
let age = prompt("What is your age?", 18);

let welcome =
  age < 18
    ? function () {
        alert("Hello!");
      }
    : function () {
        alert("Greetings!");
      };

welcome(); // ok now
```

As a rule of thumb, when we need to declare a function, the first thing to consider is Function Declaration syntax. It gives more freedom in how to organize our code, because we can call such functions before they are declared.

That's also better for readability, as it's easier to look up `function f(…) {…}` in the code than `let f = function(…) {…};`. Function Declarations are more "eye-catching".

...But if a Function Declaration does not suit us for some reason, or we need a conditional declaration (we've just seen an example), then Function Expression should be used.
