

**Bandit:** "Ladies and gentlemen, I will now play for you... the *Rondo Alla Turca*."

**Bandit:** "Hey! Piano! Ugh! Ladies and gentlemen, I'm terribly sorry, I seem to be having a little bit of trouble with my piano!"

**Bingo:** "Dad! I want to be the piano."

**Bluey:** "No, it's still my turn."

**Bandit:** "Taking turns can be difficult."

**Bingo:** "Dad, she's had *this* many turns."

**Bandit:** "You can be the bum bongos!"

**Bandit:** ♫ "Bum badumda bum, bum bongos!" ♫

**Bandit:** ♫ "Bum badumda bum, bum bongos! Bum badumda bum, bum bongos! Bum badumda bum, bum bongos! Bum badumda bum..." ♫

**Chilli:** "Ooh! Island rhythms!"

**Bandit:** ♫ "Bum badumda bum, bum bongos!" ♫

**TITLE CARD - The Magic Xylophone**

**Bluey:** [voiceover] "This episode of Bluey is called: *The Magic Xylophone!*"

**Bingo:** "Where are the *real* bongos?"

**Bingo:** "Bluey! Look!"

**Bandit:** "Huh? Oh no! The—"

**Bluey:** "Quick, Bingo!"

**Bandit:** "Let me up!"

**Bluey:** "Get the dinger thing!"

**Bandit:** "Let me up! Let me out of here! Aaah!"

**Bingo:** "Got it!"

**Bluey:** "Do a ding!"

**Bingo:** "Freeze!"

**Bandit:** "Y—"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Yeah! The Magic **Xylophone**!"

> [Xylophone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/xylophone?q=Xylophone): a musical instrument consisting of flat wooden bars of different lengths that are hit with sticks

**Bluey:** "Mum, come look at this!"

**Chilli:** "Oh, look! It's just like when we first met."

**Bluey:** "Unfreeze!"

**Bandit:** "What?! How did I get fingers up my nose? Oh. The Magic Xylophone!"

**Bandit:** "**Gimme** that xylophone!"

> [Gimme](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gimme?q=Gimme): short form of give me

**Bluey:** "Freeze!

**Bandit:** "Give me that—"

**Bluey:** "Bingo! Let's get the pens!"

**Bluey:** *(fancy voice)* "Oh, what a splendid moustache you have!"

**Bingo:** *(fancy voice)* "Ooh, lovely."

**Bingo:** "It's *my* turn to unfreeze him."

**Bluey:** "Unfreeze!"

**Bandit:** "What?! Argh, you kids! Grr!"

**Bluey:** "Run!"

**Bandit:** "Give me that magic xylophone!"

**Bandit:** "**Gotcha**!"

> [Gotcha](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gotcha?q=Gotcha): said to mean "I have got you" in order to surprise or frighten someone you have caught, or to show that you have an advantage over them

**Bandit:** "D'ah..."

**Bluey:** *(**taunting**)* "Ya-ha, too slow, Mr Moustache!"

> [taunting](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/taunting): the act of intentionally annoying and upsetting someone by making unkind remarks, laughing unkindly at them, etc.

**Bingo:** "Bluey, you're taking all the turns freezing."

**Bluey:** "Come on, Bingo. Let's get the teddies!"

**Bingo:** *(resigned)* "Okay..."

**Chilli:** "I'm off to work!"

**Bluey:** "Mum! Mum! Look at Dad now!"

**Chilli:** "This loose hair's been ***bugging*** me all morning."

> [bug](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/bug): to annoy or worry someone

**Bluey:** "Okay, I'll unfreeze him."

**Bingo:** "I wanna do it. Mum, Bluey's not letting me have any turns."

**Chilli:** "Bluey, if you don't **take turns with** people, people won't take turns with *you*."

> [take turns with someone](https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/take+turns+with): to alternate [doing something] with someone. *We both can't be there at the same time. I'll take turns with you. You have to take turns with your brother.*

**Bluey:** "But Bingo is too slow. Dad will catch her."

**Bingo:** "No, I'm not."

**Chilli:** "You can either take turns, or I'll bring the xylophone to work with me. I'll freeze my boss."

**Bluey, Bingo:** "No!"

**Bandit:** "Nnnn! Nnnn!"

**Chilli:** "Well, you know what to do, then. I'll see you later. Just make sure you unfreeze him for **toilet breaks**, okay?"

> [bathroom break](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/bathroom%20break): a brief pause in or stoppage of an activity for people to use a bathroom

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Okay!"

**Bluey:** "Here, Bingo. But stand right back here. That way you can get a **head start**. He runs *really* fast when he's mad."

> [head start](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/head-start): an advantage that someone has over other people in something such as a competition or race

**Bingo:** "Okay. Unfreeze!"

**Bandit:** "Ohh! There you are! Grrr!"

**Bluey:** "Run, Bingo! Back inside!"

**Bandit:** *(off screen)* Bingo! Bluey! Come back here!"

**Bandit:** "Where are they?! I can't find them anywhere!"

**Bandit:** "Huh, maybe they went downstairs."

**Bluey:** *(whispering)* "I can't hear him. I think we should freeze him just in case."

**Bluey:** *(whispering)* "Give me the xylophone."

**Bingo:** "No, I want to freeze him! You've had *all* the freezing turns!"

**Bluey:** "Bingo! Let go!"

**Bandit:** "Freedom!"

**Bandit:** "Got it! Mu-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! You **ding-dongs** were too busy **squabbling**! Freeze!"

> [ding-dong](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/ding-dong?q=ding-dongs): a stupid, silly, or strange person
>
> [squabble](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/squabble?q=squabbling): an argument over something that is not important

**Bandit:** "Freeze! Freeze! Freeze!"

*Bandit dings the xylophone repeatedly, but Bingo fails to freeze and runs off screen.*

Bandit: "Mu-ha-ha! Never mind, she'll keep. Nowww... look at this lovely new garden **gnome**."

> [gnome](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/gnome): an imaginary, very small, old man with a beard and a pointed hat, in traditional children's stories

**Bandit:** "Ah, this is the perfect spot. Oh, wait a minute!"

**Bandit:** "It's got a little bit of **felt pen** on the fingers. "

> [felt pen](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/felt-pen): a pen that has a point made of felt (= a thick, soft mass of fibres), used for writing and especially drawing

**Bandit:** "Probably from some ***mischief**!* I'd better get the hose."

> [mischief](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/mischief): behaviour, especially a child's, that is slightly bad but is not intended to cause serious harm or damage

**Bluey:** *(muffled noises of protest)*

**Bluey:** "Nnn! Nnnnnnn!"

**Bingo:** *(muffled)* "Unfreeze me!"

**Bingo:** "Unfreeze!

**Bluey:** "Thanks, Bingo! Dad's gone to get the hose! Let's go and hi—"

**Bingo:** "Bluey, you always never take turns with me. You just take all of the turns! And it makes me feel sad. I will unfreeze you if you promise you will let me have turns, too. Blink two times if 'Yes'."

**Bandit:** ♫ "**Gonna** **hose** my dirty garden gnome, gonna hose it *good*. Unh." ♫

> [Gonna](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/gonna?q=Gonna): informal for going to
>
> [hose](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hose): to direct water onto something using a hose

**Bandit:** "Okay, time for a little bath, garden gnome!"

**Bluey:** "Nnn! Nnnn!"

**Bandit:** "Ohhhhh, yeah!"

**Bandit:** "Huh?"

**Bluey:** "Freeze!"

**Bluey:** "We tricked you! Bingo unfroze me. I was just pretending. Now, Bingo!"

**Bluey:** "Here, Bingo. You can unfreeze him."

**Bingo:** "Thanks, Bluey."

**Bingo:** "Not just yet. I like the Daddy water **fountain**."

> [fountain](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/fountain)

**[End credits]**

