# Hospital

**Bandit:** "Here comes the mountain climber! Is she gonna — ugh — get to the top?"

**Bandit:** She made it!"

**Bingo:** "I made it!"

**Bandit:** "Uh-oh, it's getting windy!"

**Bandit:** "It's getting windy!"

**Bluey:** "Look out, Bingo!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, she's fallen down!"

**Bingo:** "Again, again!"

**Bluey:** "Do that to me!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, man. Is there some game where I just lie really still on a **comfy** bed or something?"

> [comfy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/comfy): informal for comfortable

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Hospitals!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, not hospital."

**TITLE CARD - Hospital**

**Bingo:** [voiceover] "This episode of Bluey is called: *Hospital*."

**Bingo:** "Please lie here."

**Bandit:** "Thanks, Doctor."

**Bingo:** "No, I'm the nurse."

**Bandit:** "Oh, sorry. Thanks, Nurse. My name is Telemachus."

**Bingo:** "This remote control makes the bed go up and down, Telemachus."

**Bandit:** "Oh, great!"

**Bingo:** "This one makes the legs go up..."

**Bandit:** "Ah!"

**Bingo:** "Oops, wrong button. Sorry, **dear**."

> [dear](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/dear): used in expressions of anger, disappointment, sadness, or surprise

**Bandit:** "Ohh."

**Bandit:** "Ah!"

**Bandit:** "Whoah!"

**Bingo:** "Now don't worry, we're going to make you feel all better."

**Bandit:** "Oh, good. I'm actually a bit nervous at hospitals."

**Bingo:** "There's no need to be nervous."

**Bluey:** "HELLO!"

**Bingo, Bandit:** "Aah!"

**Bluey:** "I'm the doctor."

**Bandit:** "Oh, hello, Doctor. My name is—"

**Bluey:** "Sting!"

**Bandit:** "Ouch!"

**Bingo:** "Oh, brave boy."

**Bandit:** "What was that?!"

**Bluey:** "A needle. Now, what seems to be the matter?"

**Bandit:** "Why did you give me a needle *before* asking me what's the matter?"

**Bluey:** "Because I'm *verrry* busy. Now, what's up?"

**Bandit:** "Well, my belly hurts."

**Bluey:** "Have you got a *baby* in there?"

**Bandit:** "No, I don't think so."

**Bluey:** "Nurse, do an X-ray on the big blue guy, please. I think there's a baby in there."

**Bingo:** "Yes, Doctor."

**Bandit:** "Hang on, I really don't think I have a—"

**Bluey:** "Sting!"

**Bandit:** "Ouch!"

**Bluey:** "Bye!"

**Bandit:** "**Good grief**! She certainly likes those needles."

> [**good heavens/grief/gracious!**](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/good-heavens-grief-gracious?q=Good+grief): used to emphasize how surprised, angry, shocked, etc. you are

**Bingo:** "Don't worry, sweetie. It's all to make you feel better. Now, time for your X-ray. Ready?"

**Bingo:** "Three, two, one. *ERRRRN*. X-ray!"

**Bingo:** "X-ray'll be ready in a **jiffy**!"

> [jiffy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/jiffy): a very short time

**Bandit:** "Ah, good. I'll just relax..."

**Bluey:** "I'm back! Sting!"

**Bandit:** "Yow! Bluey! I mean, Doctor. Can that be the last injection, please?"

**Bluey:** "Nope."

**Bingo:** "Here's the X-ray, Doctor."

**Bluey:** "Oh, thank you. I'll just get this **plaster** off."

> [plaster](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/plaster): Band-Aid

**Bandit:** "Huh?

**Bluey:** "Rip!"

**Bandit:** "Ow!"

**Bingo:** *(consolingly)* "Brave boy."

**Bluey:** "Oh, well this does not look good. You see just here?"

**Bandit:** "Oh, look. It's a... **possum**?"

> [possum](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/possum): a small marsupial found in Australia and New Zealand that lives in trees and has thick fur and a long nose and tail

**Bluey:** "Yes. You have a possum in your belly."

**Bingo:** "That's not a possum. It's a cat."

**Bluey:** "Oh yeah. You have a cat in your belly."

**Bandit:** "How did it get in there?"

**Bingo:** "Did you eat one?"

**Bandit:** "No!"

**Bluey:** "Well, no one really knows how cats get in your belly, but probably through your **belly button**?"

> [belly button](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/belly-button): [navel](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/navel)

**Bandit:** "What? Really?"

**Bluey:** "Yeah. Probably, they just set up a slide while you're asleep, and just slide right in, you know?"

**Bandit:** "My goodness."

**Bluey:** "We'll have to operate."

**Bingo:** "Yes, Doctor."

**Bandit:** "Woah, hang on."

**Bluey:** "Let's do this. Here's a magazine to read."

**Bandit:** "You mean you're not even going to put me to sleep first?"

**Bluey:** "Oh, yeah. I guess we could. Nurse, can you put this big blue guy to sleep, please?"

**Bingo:** "Yes, Doctor."

**Bingo:** ♫ "Go to sleep, go to sleep, go to sleep, big Telemachus..." ♫

**Bingo:** "He's asleep!"

**Bluey:** "Oh, good, I can give him another needle! Sting!"

**Bandit:** "OW! Bluey!"

**Bluey:** "You're meant to be asleep!"

**Bandit:** "No. More. Needles!"

**Bluey:** "Fine."

**Bingo:** ♫ "Go to sleep, go to sleep..." ♫

**Bingo:** *(whispering)* "He's asleep."

**Bluey:** "Okay, let's go!"

**Bandit:** "Oh! Oh! Ow!"

**Bluey:** "Now, let's get this cat out!"

**Bluey:** "Oh, I think I got it! Urgh! Here, kitty! Ah!"

**Bingo:** "Ah! That's not a cat! That's an octopus! Put it back in! I think it's supposed to be in there!"

**Bluey:** "Get back in, octopus! So many tentacles!"

**Bingo:** "Doctor, catch!"

**Bluey:** "Get. Back. In!"

**Bluey:** "Aah! Bingo! It's got the **remote**! Let go!"

> [remote](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/remote): **a** **[remote control](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/remote-control)**

**Bandit:** "Woah!"

**Bluey:** "Hey! **Let go**! Hey, I see the cat! I see the cat! Nurse, give me something to **whack** it with."

> [Let go](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/let-go?q=Let+go): to stop holding something
>
> [whack](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/whack): to hit someone or something noisily

**Bingo:** "Ok."

**Bluey:** "Oh, I've got his tail!"

**Bingo:** "Pull it!"

**Bingo:** "What happened?"

**Bluey:** "It bit me!"

**Bingo:** "Oh, you poor dear!"

**Bluey:** "That cat's not going anywhere!"

**Bingo:** "Oh, my."

**Bluey:** "Better wake the big blue guy and tell him."

**Bingo:** "You mean... we can't make him feel all better?"

**Bluey:** "Nope. Wake up, **mate**!"

> [mate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/mate): used as a friendly way of talking to someone, especially a man

**Bandit:** "OW! Bluey!"

**Bluey:** "*Doctor* Bluey."

**Bandit:** "Is the operation finished?"

**Bluey:** "Yeah. Sorry. There's nothing we can do. That cat just won't come out."

**Bandit:** "Oh. I see."

**Bluey:** "Now, I've got other patients. You're **on your own**."

> [on your own](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/own?q=on+your+own): alone

**Bandit:** "What?"

**Bluey:** "See ya!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, I thought I was going to feel all better."

**Bingo:** "I'm sorry."

**Bandit:** "That's okay. You tried your best."

**Bingo:** "Hm..."

**Bingo:** "**Leave it with me**."

> [Leave it with me](https://hinative.com/questions/3222337): "leave it to me" means you will take care of the issue yourself. if someone is wanting the dishes done and you say "leave it to me" you are volunteering to wash the dishes. if you said "leave it with me" that means you will make sure it gets done, but not necessarily yourself. so you may "leave it with me" and make your child do it.

**Bandit:** "Okay, Nurse."

**Bluey:** "Hmm, yes. Those prickles will have to come out, I'm afraid."

**Bingo:** "Excuse me, Doctor..."

**Bluey:** "I'm very busy, Nurse."

**Bingo:** "I know, but can you look at this X-ray again?"

**Bluey:** "If it's from the big blue guy, there's really nothing I can do."

**Bingo:** "Just check it a bit closer."

**Bluey:** "Fine."

**Bluey:** "Wait a minute! I didn't see this before!"

**Bluey:** "Hello, big blue guy."

**Bingo:** "His name's Telemachus."

**Bluey:** "Something else has turned up on your X-ray, Telemachus."

**Bandit:** "Really?"

**Bluey:** "Look, here."

**Bandit:** "Oh, it's a... pot plant?"

**Bingo:** "No, it's a mouse."

**Bandit:** "Ah. Of course. A mouse."

**Bluey:** "I think you swallowed a mouse."

**Bingo:** "And then the cat ran in after it!"

**Bluey:** "Because cats chase mice!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, goodness. What are you going to do?"

**Bluey:** "Hmm... What if we lured the mouse out?"

**Bingo:** "With some cheese!"

**Bluey:** "Then the cat would chase the mouse!"

**Bandit:** "Right out of my belly!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Yeah!"

**Bluey:** "A little bit lower... a little bit lower..."

**Bluey:** "There's the mouse!"

**Bluey:** "Rawr! And there's the cat!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "**Hooray**!"

> [Hooray](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/hooray?q=Hooray): [hurray](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/hurray)

**Bingo:** "Oh, good kitty."

**Bluey:** "How do you feel?

**Bandit:** "Hmm... I feel all better!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Hooray!"

**Bandit:** "Thanks, Doctor. And thank you, Nurse."

**Bingo:** "You're welcome."

**Bandit:** "Well, if that's that, I guess I'll be on my way."

**Bluey:** "Oh, one more thing."

**Bandit:** "What's that?

**Bluey:** "Sting!"

**Bandit:** "Ow!"