# Keepy Uppy

**Bluey:** "Ooh! Morning, balloons!"

**Bluey:** "I mean, morning, *last* balloon."

**Chilli:** "You ready?"

**Bingo:** "Ready!"

**Chilli:** "Keep your arms up!"

**Chilli:** "Ah!"

**Bingo:** "Again!"

**Chilli:** "Morning, Bluey! Oh, what have you got there?"

**Bluey:** "This is my pet bird!"

**Bingo:** "He's saying 'Good morniiiiiing!'"

**Chilli:** "Oh, good morning, pet **birdie**."

> [birdie](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/birdie): a small bird

**Bluey:** "Go free, birdie!"

**Chilli:** "Oh, that's funny, is it?"

**Bluey:** "Yeah!"

**Bingo:** "Yeah, it is!"

**Chilli:** "Well, I've got a game for you."

**Bluey:** *(excitedly)* "Is it Keepy Uppy?!"

**Chilli:** "Yeah, it's Keepy Uppy."

**Bluey:** "It's Keepy Uppy! Woo!"

**TITLE CARD - Keepy Uppy**

**Bluey:** [voiceover] "This episode of Bluey is called: *Keepy Uppy*."

**Bingo:** "What's Keepy Uppy?"

**Bluey:** "You have to keep the balloon in the air and can't let it touch the ground."

**Bingo:** "What happens if it touches the ground?"

**Chilli:** "Oh, nothing, Bingo. It's just a game."

**Bingo:** "Oh, okay."

**Chilli:** "You ready?"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Yeah."

**Chilli:** "Okay... go!"

**Bingo:** "Yaah! Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Bwut!"

**Chilli:** "Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Aah, Bingo, quick!"

**Bingo:** "Yaa! Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Bwut!"

**Bingo:** "I got it, Bluey! Bwut! Eee, get it!"

**Bluey:** "I got it, I got it!"

**Bingo:** "Bluey, get it!"

**Bluey:** "Whooo!"

**Bluey:** "I got it!"

**Bingo:** "Oh, good."

**Bluey:** "No, no, no, quick, quick!"

**Chilli:** "Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Aah, Mum, you're making it harder!"

**Chilli:** "Okay, I'm gonna cook **brekkie**, kids."

> [brekkie](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/brekkie): chiefly British slang : breakfast

**Chilli:** "Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Mum!"

**Bluey:** "Look! What if we do small ones? Bwut!"

**Bingo:** "Bwut! This is so easy now."

**Bingo:** "Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Check it out, Mum! Bwut!"

**Chilli:** "Hey, nice strategy, balloon girls!"

**Bingo:** "I'm a Keepy Uppy expert."

**Bluey:** "Yep, but it's not as fun now. Can you make it hard again?"

**Chilli:** "Sorry, pickle, I've got my hands full."

**Bandit:** ♫ "Oh good morning, everybody! Said good morning, everyone! Uh!" ♫

**Bandit:** "**Whaddup**, **party people**?"

> [Whaddup](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/whaddup): (slang) Alternative spelling of what's up
>
> [**party people**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Party_People): People who love to party

**Bluey:** "Dad, we're playing Keepy Uppy. Can you make it harder?"

**Bandit:** "Ah, my newspaper."

**Bingo:** "Dad!"

**Bluey:** "Aah! Bingo, help!"

**Bingo:** "I can't! I'm a newspaper!"

**Bandit:** "Hmm, ah. Old **so-and-so** **is at it again**. Hmm, yes, yes..."

> [so-and-so](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/so-and-so): used instead of a particular name to refer to someone or something, especially when the real name is not important or you have forgotten it
>
> [be at it again](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/be-at-it-again): to be doing something that you have done before, often something annoying

**Bluey:** *(gasps)* "Look! Wow."

**Chilli:** "Woah, look at that!"

**Bingo:** "Bluey, help!"

**Bluey:** "I'll save you, Bingo! Let her go!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, you want to read the newspaper, Bluey? Okay, just don't do the suduku."

**Bandit:** "Oh, look, lovely orange juice! Yes, please!"

**Bluey:** "No, no, no! Bwut!"

**Bingo:** *(panting)* "I'll get it!"

**Bluey:** "That's it, Bingo!"

**Bandit:** "Oh, dear child. You grow up so fast."

**Bluey:** "Ah, Dad, let go! Bingo, get it! Don't let it touch the ground!"

**Bingo:** "Bluey, help! I can't do it by myself!"

**Bandit:** "Dear child, embrace your father."

**Bluey:** "Let go!"

**Bluey:** "Bwut!"

**Bingo:** "Aah, I'll get it!"

**Bandit:** *(dramatically)* "Oh, this heat is **oppressive**. I'll just turn on this fan..."

> [oppressive](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/oppressive): If the weather or heat is oppressive, it is too hot and there is no wind

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Dad!"

**Bluey:** "Mine, mine!"

**Bandit:** "There's leaves everywhere!"

**Bluey:** "There's too many toys on the ground! Bwut!"

**Bingo:** "Who is responsible for this mess?"

**Bandit:** "My, my, all these toys left lying around sure are making it difficult to keep the balloon up."

**Bingo:** "We know!"

**Bandit:** "Can you imagine how *easy* this would be if you'd **tidied them all away**?"

> [**tidy something away**](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/tidy-away): to put things back in drawers, cupboards, and other places where they are kept, after you have used them

**Bluey:** "That isn't helping!"

**Bingo:** "Oh no!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Ooh!"

**Bluey:** "Ha-ha, see, Dad? Our toys saved the balloon."

**Bandit:** "Not for long!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "No!"

**Bingo:** "You get it!"

**Bluey:** "Yaa!"

**Bluey:** "It's heading for the fan!"

**Bingo:** "Oh no!"

**Chilli:** "Oh no!"

**Chilli:** "We can't let it touch the ground!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "We know!"

**Bluey:** "Bwut!"

**Chilli:** "No, I mean we *really* can't let it touch the ground. Balloons **pop** if they **touch grass**!"

> [pop](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/pop): to make a short little explosive sound, often by bursting something, or to cause this to happen
>
> [touch grass](https://blog.hootsuite.com/social-media-definitions/touch-grass/): Touch grass is used on the Internet to tell someone to go outside. The phrase also implies that the person the insult is directed to spends too much time online, and they physically need to get outside and “touch some grass” to reconnect with the real world.

**Bingo:** "What? You said nothing would happen!"

**Bluey:** "It's my last balloon!"

**Bingo:** "Catch it!"

**Bluey:** "It's going into Lucky's yard!"

**Bluey:** "Lucky, the balloon!"

**Chilli:** "Get it, Lucky!"

**Lucky:** "I'll get it! Bwut!"

**Bluey:** "Aah! Lucky!"

**Lucky:** "I'm not going to make it!"

**Chilli:** "Oh no!"

**Bluey:** "No!"

**Pat:** "Mine! Mine!"

**Pat:** "Yours, Lucky! Get onto it!"

**Lucky:** "Good one, Dad! I got it! I got it!

**Pat:** "That's it, boy! I got it! Mine!"

**Pat:** "Uh! Oh, **I've done me hammy**! You get it, Lucky."

> [ **I've done me hammy**](https://www.reddit.com/r/bluey/comments/p8opys/i_got_it_mine_oh_ive_done_me_hammy/): I've hurt/pulled my hamstring

**Bluey:** "Lucky! Get it!"

**Lucky:** "Okay, Bluey!"

**Lucky:** "Yaa! There ya go, Bluey!"

**Bluey:** "Thanks, Lucky's dad!"

**Pat:** "No worries, Bluey."

**Chilli:** "We can catch it! I can catch it!"

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Catch it, Mum!"

**Bandit:** "Looks like rain!"

Chilli gasps as the balloon floats down onto the grass. It lands, and pops. Bluey and Bingo scream, Chilli winces at the kids' screaming."

**Bluey, Bingo:** "No!"

**Bluey:** "Oh, my balloon."

**Bingo:** "It's popped."

**Bandit:** "It's all good; we can blow up another one."

**Bluey:** "But that was my last balloon."

**Bandit:** "Oh. Did I make that a little *too* fun?"

**Bingo:** "Yes."

**Bluey:** "Yeah, you did."

**Bandit:** "Sorry, **squirts**. It's a hard one to get right."

> [squirt](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/squirt?q=squirts): a young or small person who you do not consider to be important and who has behaved rudely towards you

**Bluey:** "It was pretty fun, though."

**Bingo:** "Yeah, it was definitely quite fun."

**Lucky:** "Yeah, it was really fun."

**Chilli:** "You know, I think we've got one last balloon left."

**Bluey, Bingo:** "Really?"

**Bluey:** "For real life?"

**Chilli:** "Yeah, a big blue one."

**Bandit:** "Uh-oh..."

**Bingo:** "Blow up the Daddy balloon!"

**Chilli:** "Yeah!"

**Bluey:** "Ready!"

**Chilli:** "Shall we play Keepy Uppy?"

**Bluey:** "Uh-uh!"

**Chilli:** *(knowingly)* "Oh..."

**Bandit:** "What? What?"

**Bluey:** "Go free, birdie!"

**Chilli:** "Oh no!"

**[End credits]**

**Chilli:** "Yeah, ya big **lump**."

> [lump](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/lump): a heavy, awkward, stupid person