A module is not just source code. It is also an exact specification of the dependencies of the code within the module. Every module has a `go.mod` file in its root directory. Running `go mod init` creates this file for you. You shouldn’t edit the `go.mod` file directly. Instead, use the `go get` and `go mod tidy` commands to manage changes to the file.

Unlike other languages, Go imports only whole packages. You can’t limit the import to specific types, functions, constants, or variables within a package.

Remember to run `go fmt` before you compile your code, and, at the very least, before you commit source code changes to your repository! If you forget, make a separate commit that does only `go fmt ./...` so you don’t hide logic changes in an avalanche of formatting changes.

The `go fmt` command won’t fix braces on the wrong line because of the semicolon insertion rule. Like C or Java, Go requires a semicolon at the end of every statement. However, Go developers should never put the semicolons in themselves. The Go compiler adds them automatically, following a simple rule described in Effective Go. If the last token before a newline is any of the following, the lexer inserts a semicolon after the token:

- An identifier (which includes words like `int` and `float64`) 
- A basic literal such as a number or string constant 
- One of the tokens: `break`, `continue`, `fallthrough`, `return`, `++`, `--`, `)`, or `}`

In addition to the advice in this book, all Go developers should read through [Effective Go](https://go.dev/doc/effective_go) and the [Code Review Comments page on Go’s wiki](https://go.dev/wiki/CodeReviewComments) to understand what idiomatic Go code looks like.

### Makefiles

```makefile
.DEFAULT_GOAL := build

.PHONY: fmt vet build clean
fmt:
	go fmt ./...

vet: fmt
	go vet ./...

build: vet
	go build

clean:
	go clean
```

Each possible operation is called a **target**. The `.DEFAULT_GOAL` defines which target is run when no target is specified. In this case, the default is the build target. Next you have the target definitions. The word before the colon (`:`) is the name of the target. Any words after the target (like `vet` in the line `build: vet`) are the other targets that must be run before the specified target runs. The tasks that are performed by the target are on the indented lines after the target. The `.PHONY` line keeps `make` from getting confused if a directory or file in your project has the same name as one of the listed targets.

Run `make` and you should see the following output:

```bash
$ make 
go fmt ./...
go vet ./...
go build
```

Entering a single command formats the code correctly, checks it for nonobvious errors, and compiles it. You can also vet the code with `make vet`, or just run the formatter with `make fmt`. This might not seem like a big improvement, but ensuring that formatting and vetting always happen before a developer (or a script running on a continuous integration build server) triggers a build means you won’t miss any steps.

One drawback to Makefiles is that they are exceedingly picky. You **must** indent the steps in a target with a tab. They are also not supported out-of-the-box on Windows.

