Integer literals are base 10 by default, but different prefixes are used to indicate other bases: `0b` for binary (base 2), `0o` for octal (base 8), or `0x` for hexadecimal (base 16). You can use either upper- or lowercase letters for the prefix. A leading 0 with no letter after it is another way to represent an octal literal. Do not use it, as it is very confusing. Octal representations are rare, mostly used to represent POSIX permission flag values (such as `0o777` for `rwxrwxrwx`).

To make it easier to read longer integer literals, Go allows you to put underscores in the middle of your literal. This allows you to, for example, group by thousands in base 10 (1_234). These underscores have no effect on the value of the number. The only limitations on underscores are that they can’t be at the beginning or end of numbers, and you can’t have them next to each other.

A *rune* literal represents a character and is surrounded by single quotes. Unlike many other languages, in Go single quotes and double quotes are not interchangeable. There are also several backslash-escaped rune literals, with the most useful ones being newline (`'\n'`), tab (`'\t'`), single quote (`'\''`), and backslash (`'\\'`).

There are two ways to indicate string literals. Most of the time, you should use double quotes to create an **interpreted string literal** (e.g., type "Greetings and Salutations"). These contain zero or more rune literals. They are called “interpreted” because they interpret rune literals (both numeric and backslash-escaped) into single characters. If you need to include backslashes, double quotes, or newlines in your string, using a `raw string literal` is easier.

 Go has a large number of numeric types: 12 types (and a few special names) that are grouped into three categories. If you are coming from a language like JavaScript that gets along with only a single numeric type, this might seem like a lot. And in fact, some types are used frequently while others are more esoteric.

A byte is an alias for uint8; it is legal to assign, compare, or perform mathematical operations between a byte and a uint8. However, you rarely see uint8 used in Go code; just call it a byte.

The second special name is int. On a 32-bit CPU, int is a 32-bit signed integer like an int32. On most 64-bit CPUs, int is a 64-bit signed integer, just like an int64. Because int isn’t consistent from platform to platform, it is a compile-time error to assign, compare, or perform mathematical operations between an int and an int32 or int64 without a type conversion.

The third special name is uint. It follows the same rules as int, only it is unsigned (the values are always 0 or positive). There are two other special names for integer types, rune and uintptr.

Go provides more integer types than some other languages. Given all these choices, you might wonder when you should use each of them. You should follow three simple rules:

- If you are working with a binary file format or network protocol that has an integer of a specific size or sign, use the corresponding integer type.
- If you are writing a library function that should work with any integer type, take advantage of Go’s generics support and use a generic type parameter to represent any integer type
- In all other cases, just use int.

While Go lets you use == and != to compare floats, don’t do it. Because of the inexact nature of floats, two floating-point values might not be equal when you think they should be. Instead, define a maximum allowed variance and see if the difference between two floats is less than that. This value (sometimes called *epsilon*) depends on your accuracy needs;

The rune type is an alias for the int32 type, just as byte is an alias for uint8. If you are referring to a character, use the rune type, not the int32 type. They might be the same to the compiler, but you want to use the type that clarifies the intent of your code:

```go
var myFirstInitial rune = 'J' // good - the type name matches the usage 
var myLastInitial int32 = 'B' // bad - legal but confusing
```

You must use a type conversion when variable types do not match. Even different-sized integers and floats must be converted to the same type to interact. This makes it clear exactly what type you want without having to memorize any type conversion rules

```go
var x int = 10 
var y float64 = 30.2 
var sum1 float64 = float64(x) + y 
var sum2 int = x + int(y) 
```

This strictness around types has other implications. Since all type conversions in Go are explicit, you cannot treat another Go type as a boolean. In many languages, a nonzero number or a nonempty string can be interpreted as a boolean true. Just like automatic type promotion, the rules for “truthy” values vary from language to language and can be confusing. Unsurprisingly, Go doesn’t allow truthiness. In fact, no other type can be converted to a bool, implicitly or explicitly. If you want to convert from another data type to boolean, you must use one of the comparison operators (==, !=, >, <, <=, or >=). For example, to check if variable x is equal to 0, the code would be x == 0. If you want to check if string s is empty, use s == "".

There’s one more way to use var. If you are declaring multiple variables at once, you can wrap them in a declaration list:

```go
var (     
  x    int     
  y        = 20     
  z    int = 30     
  d, e     = 40, "hello"     
  f, g string 
)
```

The `:=` operator can do one trick that you cannot do with `var`: it allows you to assign values to existing variables too. As long as at least one new variable is on the lefthand side of the `:=`, any of the other variables can already exist:

```go
x := 10 
x, y := 30, "hello"
```

Using `:=` has one limitation. If you are declaring a variable at the package level, you must use var because `:=` is not legal outside of functions

In some situations within functions, you should avoid `:=`:

- When initializing a variable to its zero value, use `var x int`. This makes it clear that the zero value is intended.
- When assigning an untyped constant or a literal to a variable and the default type for the constant or literal isn’t the type you want for the variable, use the long var form with the type specified. While it is legal to use a type conversion to specify the type of the value and use := to write `x := byte(20)`, it is idiomatic to write `var x byte = 20`.
- Because `:=` allows you to assign to both new and existing variables, it sometimes creates new variables when you think you are reusing existing ones. In those situations, explicitly declare all your new variables with var to make it clear which variables are new, and then use the assignment operator (=) to assign values to both new and old variables.

While var and := allow you to declare multiple variables on the same line, use this style only when assigning multiple values returned from a function or the comma ok idiom.

You should rarely declare variables outside of functions, in what’s called the package block. Package-level variables whose values change are a bad idea. When you have a variable outside of a function, it can be difficult to track the changes made to it, which makes it hard to understand how data is flowing through your program. This can lead to subtle bugs. As a general rule, you should only declare variables in the package block that are effectively immutable.

Be aware that `const` in Go is very limited. Constants in Go are a way to give names to literals. They can only hold values that the compiler can figure out at compile time. This means that they can be assigned: 

- Numeric literals 
- true and false 
- Strings 
- Runes 
- The values returned by the built-in functions `complex`, `real`, `imag`, `len`, and `cap` 
- Expressions that consist of operators and the preceding values

Another value that can be used with const is called `iota`.

Go doesn’t provide a way to specify that a value calculated at runtime is immutable. For example, the following code will fail to compile with the error `x + y (value of type int) is not constant`:

```go
x := 5 
y := 10 
const z = x + y // this won't compile!
```

As you’ll see in the next chapter, there are no immutable arrays, slices, maps, or structs, and there’s no way to declare that a field in a struct is immutable.

Constants in Go are a way to give names to literals. There is no way in Go to declare that a variable is immutable.

Whether to make a constant typed depends on why the constant was declared. If you are giving a name to a mathematical constant that could be used with multiple numeric types, keep the constant untyped. In general, leaving a constant untyped gives you more flexibility. In certain situations, you’ll want a constant to enforce a type. Here’s what an untyped constant declaration looks like:

```go
const x = 10
```

All of the following assignments are legal:

```go
var y int = x 
var z float64 = x 
var d byte = x
```

Here’s what a typed constant declaration looks like:

```go
const typedX int = 10
```

This constant can be assigned directly only to an int. Assigning it to any other type produces a compile-time error like this: `cannot use typedX (type int) as type float64 in assignment`.

The compiler’s unused variable check is not exhaustive. As long as a variable is read once, the compiler won’t complain, even if there are writes to the variable that are never read.

```go
func main() {     
  x := 10 // this assignment isn't read!     
  x = 20     
  fmt.Println(x)     
  x = 30 // this assignment isn't read! 
}
```

While the compiler and `go vet` do not catch the unused assignments of 10 and 30 to x, third-party tools can detect them.

The Go compiler won’t stop you from creating unread package-level variables. This is one more reason you should avoid creating package-level variables.

Perhaps surprisingly, the Go compiler allows you to create unread constants with const. This is because constants in Go are calculated at compile time and cannot have any side effects. This makes them easy to eliminate: if a constant isn’t used, it is simply not included in the compiled binary.

In many languages, constants are always written in all uppercase letters, with words separated by underscores (names like INDEX_COUNTER or NUMBER_TRIES). Go does not follow this pattern. This is because Go uses the case of the first letter in the name of a package-level declaration to determine if the item is accessible outside the package.