### Arrays

If you have initial values for the array, you specify them with an **array literal**:

```go
var x = [3]int{10, 20, 30}
```

If you have a **sparse array** (an array where most elements are set to their zero value), you can specify only the indices with nonzero values in the array literal:

```go
var x = [12]int{1, 5: 4, 6, 10: 100, 15}
```

This creates an array of 12 ints with the following values: `[1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 4, 6, 0, 0, 0, 100, 15]`.

When using an array literal to initialize an array, you can replace the number that specifies the number of elements in the array with `...`:

```go
var x = [...]int{10, 20, 30}
```

You can use `==` and `!=` to compare two arrays. Arrays are equal if they are the same length and contain equal values:

```go
var x = [...]int{1, 2, 3} 
var y = [3]int{1, 2, 3} 
fmt.Println(x == y) // prints true
```

Go has only one-dimensional arrays, but you can simulate multidimensional arrays:

```go
var x [2][3]int
```

Earlier I said that arrays in Go are rarely used explicitly. This is because they come with an unusual limitation: Go considers the size of the array to be part of the type of the array. This makes an array that’s declared to be `[3]int` a different type from an array that’s declared to be `[4]int`. This also means that you cannot use a variable to specify the size of an array, because types must be resolved at compile time, not at runtime.

What’s more, you can’t use a type conversion to directly convert arrays of different sizes to identical types. Because you can’t convert arrays of different sizes into each other, you can’t write a function that works with arrays of any size and you can’t assign arrays of different sizes to the same variable.

Because of these restrictions, don’t use arrays unless you know the exact length you need ahead of time. For example, some of the cryptographic functions in the standard library return arrays because the sizes of checksums are defined as part of the algorithm. This is the exception, not the rule.

### Slices

What makes slices so useful is that you can grow slices as needed. This is because the length of a slice is not part of its type. This removes the biggest limitations of arrays and allows you to write a single function that processes slices of any size.

In Go, `nil` is an identifier that represents the lack of a value for some types. Like the untyped numeric constants you saw in the previous chapter, `nil` has no type, so it can be assigned or compared against values of different types. A `nil` slice contains nothing.

A slice is the first type you’ve seen that **isn’t comparable**. It is a compile-time error to use `==` to see if two slices are identical or `!=` to see if they are different. The only thing you can compare a slice with using `==` is `nil`:

```go
var x []int
fmt.Println(x == nil) // prints true
```

Since Go 1.21, the slices package in the standard library includes two functions to compare slices. The `slices.Equal` function takes in two slices and returns true if the slices are the same length, and all of the elements are equal. **It requires the elements of the slice to be comparable**. The other function, `slices.EqualFunc`, lets you pass in a function to determine equality and **does not require the slice elements to be comparable**.

The `reflect` package contains a function called `DeepEqual` that can compare almost anything, including slices. It’s a legacy function, primarily intended for testing. Before the inclusion of `slices.Equal` and `slices.EqualFunc`, `reflect.DeepEqual` was often used to compare slices. Don’t use it in new code, as it is slower and less safe than using the functions in the `slices` package.

Functions like `len` are built into Go because they can do things that can’t be done by the functions that you can write. Go doesn’t let developers write a function that accepts any string, array, slice, channel, or map, but rejects other types.

The `append` function takes at least two parameters, a slice of any type and a value of that type. It returns a slice of the same type, which is assigned to the variable that was passed to append. You can append more than one value at a time:

```go
var x = []int{1, 2, 3} 
x = append(x, 4)
x = append(x, 5, 6, 7)
```

One slice is appended onto another by using the `...` operator to expand the source slice into individual values

```go
y := []int{20, 30, 40} 
x = append(x, y...)
```

It is a compile-time error if you forget to assign the value returned from append. You might be wondering why as it seems a bit repetitive. I will talk about this in greater detail in Chapter 5, but Go is a call-by-value language. Every time you pass a parameter to a function, Go makes a copy of the value that’s passed in. Passing a slice to the append function actually passes a copy of the slice to the function. The function adds the values to the copy of the slice and returns the copy. You then assign the returned slice back to the variable in the calling function.

Every slice also has a capacity, which is the number of consecutive memory locations reserved. This can be larger than the length. Each time you append to a slice, one or more values is added to the end of the slice. Each value added increases the length by one. When the length reaches the capacity, there’s no more room to put values. If you try to add additional values when the length equals the capacity, the append function uses the Go runtime to allocate a new backing array for the slice with a larger capacity. The values in the original backing array are copied to the new one, the new values are added to the end of the new backing array, and the slice is updated to refer to the new backing array. Finally, the updated slice is returned.

Every high-level language relies on a set of libraries to enable programs written in that language to run, and Go is no exception. The Go runtime provides services like memory allocation and garbage collection, concurrency support, networking, and implementations of built-in types and functions. The Go runtime is compiled into every Go binary. This is different from languages that use a virtual machine, which must be installed separately to allow programs written in those languages to function. Including the runtime in the binary makes it easier to distribute Go programs and avoids worries about compatibility issues between the runtime and the program. The drawback of including the runtime in the binary is that even the simplest Go program produces a binary that’s about `2 MB`.

When a slice grows via append, it takes time for the Go runtime to allocate new memory and copy the existing data from the old memory to the new. The old memory also needs to be garbage collected. For this reason, the Go runtime usually increases a slice by more than one each time it runs out of capacity. The rule as of Go 1.18 is to double the capacity of a slice when the current capacity is less than `256`. A bigger slice increases by `(current_capacity + 768)/4`. This slowly converges at 25% growth (a slice with capacity of 512 will grow by 63%, but a slice with capacity 4,096 will grow by only 30%).

Just as the built-in `len` function returns the current length of a slice, the built-in `cap` function returns the current capacity of a slice. It is used far less frequently than `len`. Most of the time, `cap` is used to check if a slice is large enough to hold new data, or if a call to make is needed to create a new slice.

If you know how many things you plan to put into a slice, create it with the correct initial capacity. You do that with the make function.

```go
x := make([]int, 5)
```

This creates an int slice with a length of 5 and a capacity of 5. Since it has a length of 5, `x[0]` through `x[4]` are valid elements, and they are all initialized to 0.

One common beginner mistake is to try to populate those initial elements using append:

```go
x := make([]int, 5) 
x = append(x, 10)
```

The 10 is placed at the end of the slice, after the zero values in elements 0–4 because append always increases the length of a slice. The value of x is now `[0 0 0 0 0 10]`, with a length of 6 and a capacity of 10 (the capacity was doubled as soon as the sixth element was appended).

You can also specify an initial capacity with make:

```go
x := make([]int, 5, 10)
```

This creates an int slice with a length of 5 and a capacity of 10.

You can also create a slice with zero length but a capacity that’s greater than zero:

```go
x := make([]int, 0, 10)
```

In this case, you have a non-nil slice with a length of 0 but a capacity of 10. Since the length is 0, you can’t directly index into it, but you can append values to it:

```go
x := make([]int, 0, 10) 
x = append(x, 5,6,7,8)
```

The value of x is now `[5 6 7 8]`, with a length of 4 and a capacity of 10.

Go 1.21 added a `clear` function that takes in a slice and sets all of the slice’s elements to their zero value. The length of the slice remains unchanged.

```go
s := []string{"first", "second", "third"} 
fmt.Println(s, len(s))  // [first second third] 3 
clear(s) 
fmt.Println(s, len(s)) // [  ] 3
```

If it’s possible that the slice won’t need to grow at all, use a `var` declaration with no assigned value to create a **nil slice**:

```go
var data []int
```

You can create a slice using an **empty slice literal**:

```go
var x = []int{}
```

This creates a slice with **zero length and zero capacity**. It is confusingly different from a **nil slice**. Because of implementation reasons, **comparing a zero-length slice to nil returns false**, while **comparing a nil slice to nil returns true**. **For simplicity, favor nil slices. A zero-length slice is useful only when converting a slice to JSON.**

```go
var x = []int{}
var y []int
fmt.Println(x == nil) // false
fmt.Println(y == nil) // true
```

If you have a good idea of how large your slice needs to be, but don’t know what those values will be when you are writing the program, use `make`. The question then becomes whether you should specify a nonzero length in the call to `make` or specify a zero length and a nonzero capacity. There are three possibilities:

- If you are using a slice as a **buffer**, then specify a nonzero length.
- If you are sure you know the exact size you want, you can specify the length and index into the slice to set the values. This is often done when transforming values in one slice and storing them in a second. The downside to this approach is that if you have the size wrong, you’ll end up with either zero values at the end of the slice or a panic from trying to access elements that don’t exist.
- In other situations, use `make` with a zero length and a specified capacity. This allows you to use append to add items to the slice. If the number of items turns out to be smaller, you won’t have an extraneous zero value at the end. If the number of items is larger, your code will not panic.

The Go community is split between the second and third approaches. I personally prefer using `append` with a slice initialized to a zero length. It might be slower in some situations, but it is less likely to introduce a bug.

When you take a slice from a slice, you are not making a copy of the data. Instead, you now have two variables that are sharing memory. This means that changes to an element in a slice affect all slices that share that element. Let’s see what happens when you change values.

```go
x := []string{"a", "b", "c", "d"} 
//            y[0] y[1]
//                 z[0] z[1] z[2]
y := x[:2] 
z := x[1:] 
x[1] = "y" 
y[0] = "x" 
z[1] = "z" 
fmt.Println("x:", x)  // x: [x y z d]
fmt.Println("y:", y)  // y: [x y]
fmt.Println("z:", z)  // z: [y z d]
```

Changing x modified both y and z, while changes to y and z modified x.

Slicing slices gets extra confusing when combined with `append`:

```go
x := []string{"a", "b", "c", "d"} 
//            y[0] y[1]
y := x[:2] 
fmt.Println(cap(x), cap(y))  // 4 4
y = append(y, "z") 
fmt.Println("x:", x)  // x: [a b z d] 
fmt.Println("y:", y)  // y: [a b z]
```

What’s going on? Whenever you take a slice from another slice, the subslice’s capacity is set to the capacity of the original slice, minus the starting offset of the subslice within the original slice. This means elements of the original slice beyond the end of the subslice, including unused capacity, are shared by both slices. When you make the y slice from x, the length is set to 2, but the capacity is set to 4, the same as x. Since the capacity is 4, appending onto the end of y puts the value in the third position of x.

This behavior creates some odd scenarios, with multiple slices appending and over‐writing each other’s data:

```go
x := make([]string, 0, 5) 
x = append(x, "a", "b", "c", "d") 
//            y[0] y[1]
//                      z[0] z[1]
y := x[:2] 
z := x[2:] 
fmt.Println(cap(x), cap(y), cap(z))  // 5 5 3
y = append(y, "i", "j", "k") 
x = append(x, "x") 
z = append(z, "y") 
fmt.Println("x:", x)  // x: [a b i j y]
fmt.Println("y:", y)  // y: [a b i j y]
fmt.Println("z:", z)  // z: [i j y]
```

To avoid complicated slice situations, you should either never use `append` with a subslice or make sure that append doesn’t cause an overwrite by using a **full slice expression**. This is a little weird, but it makes clear how much memory is shared between the parent slice and the subslice. The **full slice expression** includes a third part, which indicates the last position in the parent slice’s capacity that’s available for the subslice. Subtract the starting offset from this number to get the subslice’s capacity:

```go
x := make([]string, 0, 5) 
x = append(x, "a", "b", "c", "d") 
//            y[0] y[1]
//                      z[0] z[1]
y := x[:2:2]  // full slice expression
z := x[2:4:4] // full slice expression
fmt.Println(cap(x), cap(y), cap(z))  // 5 2 2
y = append(y, "i", "j", "k") 
x = append(x, "x") 
z = append(z, "y") 
fmt.Println("x:", x)  // x: [a b c d x]
fmt.Println("y:", y)  // y: [a b i j k]
fmt.Println("z:", z)  // z: [c d y]
```

Both y and z have a capacity of 2. Because you limited the capacity of the subslices to their lengths, appending additional elements onto y and z created new slices that didn’t interact with the other slices. After this code runs, x is set to `[a b c d x]`, y is set to `[a b i j k]`, and z is set to `[c d y]`.

> Be careful when taking a slice of a slice! Both slices share the same memory, and changes to one are reflected in the other. Avoid modifying slices after they have been sliced or if they were produced by slicing. Use a **three-part slice expression** to prevent append from sharing capacity between slices.

If you need to create a slice that’s independent of the original, use the built-in `copy` function:

```go
x := []int{1, 2, 3, 4} 
y := make([]int, 4) 
num := copy(y, x) 
fmt.Println(y, num) // [1 2 3 4] 4
```

The copy function takes two parameters. The first is the destination slice, and the second is the source slice. The function copies as many values as it can from source to destination, limited by whichever slice is smaller, and returns the number of elements copied. The capacity of x and y doesn’t matter; it’s the length that’s important.

You can also copy a subset of a slice. The following code copies the first two elements of a four-element slice into a two-element slice:

```go
x := []int{1, 2, 3, 4} 
y := make([]int, 2) 
num := copy(y, x)	
fmt.Println(y, num) // [1 2] 2
```

##### Converting Arrays to Slices

Slices aren’t the only thing you can slice. If you have an array, you can take a slice from it using a slice expression. This is a useful way to bridge an array to a function that takes only slices. To convert an entire array into a slice, use the [`:`] syntax:

```go
xArray := [4]int{5, 6, 7, 8} 
xSlice := xArray[:]
```

You can also convert a subset of an array into a slice:

```go
x := [4]int{5, 6, 7, 8} 
y := x[:2] 
z := x[2:]
```

Be aware that taking a slice from an array has the same memory-sharing properties as taking a slice from a slice:

```go
	xArray := [4]int{5, 6, 7, 8}
	xSlice := xArray[:]
	xSlice[0] = 100
	fmt.Println(xSlice)  // [100 6 7 8]
	fmt.Println(xArray)  // [100 6 7 8]
```

```go
x := [4]int{5,   6,   7,  8} 
//         y[0] y[1]
//                  z[0] z[1]
y := x[:2] 
z := x[2:] 
x[0] = 10 
fmt.Println("x:", x)  // x: [10 6 7 8]
fmt.Println("y:", y)  // y: [10 6]
fmt.Println("z:", z)  // z: [7 8]
```

##### Converting Slices to Arrays

When you convert a slice to an array, the data in the slice is copied to new memory. That means that changes to the slice won’t affect the array, and vice versa.

```go
xSlice := []int{1, 2, 3, 4} 
xArray := [4]int(xSlice) 
smallArray := [2]int(xSlice) 
xSlice[0] = 10 
fmt.Println(xSlice)   // [10 2 3 4] 
fmt.Println(xArray)   // [1 2 3 4] 
fmt.Println(smallArray) // [1 2]
```

The size of the array must be specified at compile time. It’s a compile-time error to use `[...]` in a **slice to array type conversion**.

While the size of the array can be smaller than the size of the slice, it cannot be bigger. Unfortunately, the compiler cannot detect this, and your code will panic at runtime if you specify an array size that’s bigger than the length (not the capacity) of the slice.

```go
xSlice := []int{1, 2, 3, 4} 
panicArray := [5]int(xSlice) 
fmt.Println(panicArray)  // panic: runtime error: cannot convert slice with length 4 to array or pointer to array with length 5
```

After converting a slice to an array pointer, the storage between the two is shared. A change to one will change the other:

```go
xSlice := []int{1,2,3,4} 
xArrayPointer := (*[4]int)(xSlice)
xSlice[0] = 10 
xArrayPointer[1] = 20 
fmt.Println(xSlice) // prints [10 20 3 4] 
fmt.Println(xArrayPointer) // prints &[10 20 3 4]
```

##### Strings and Runes and Bytes

While it’s handy that Go allows you to use slicing notation to make substrings and use index notation to extract individual entries from a string, you should be careful when doing so. Since strings are immutable, they don’t have the modification problems that slices of slices do. There is a different problem, though. A string is composed of a sequence of bytes, while a code point in UTF-8 can be anywhere from one to four bytes long. When dealing with languages other than English or with emojis, you run into code points that are multiple bytes long in UTF-8.

Go allows you to pass a string to the built-in `len` function to find the length of the string. Given that string index and slice expressions count positions in bytes, it’s not surprising that the length returned is the length in bytes, not in code points.

Even though Go allows you to use slicing and indexing syntax with strings, you should use it only when you know that your string contains only characters that take up one byte.

Because of this complicated relationship among runes, strings, and bytes, Go has some interesting type conversions between these types. A single rune or byte can be converted to a string:

```go
var a rune    = 'x' 
var s string  = string(a) 
var b byte    = 'y' 
var s2 string = string(b)
```

A common bug for new Go developers is to try to make an int into a string by using a type conversion:

```go
var x int = 65 
var y = string(x) 
fmt.Println(y)
```

This results in y having the value “ A,” not “65.” As of Go 1.15, `go vet` blocks a type conversion to string from any integer type other than rune or byte.

Most data in Go is read and written as a sequence of bytes, so the most common string type conversions are back and forth with a slice of bytes. Slices of runes are uncommon.

Rather than use the slice and index expressions with strings, you should extract substrings and code points from strings using the functions in the `strings` and `unicode/utf8` packages in the standard library. You can use a `for-range` loop to iterate over the code points in a string.

##### Maps

```go
var nilMap map[string]int
```

In this case, `nilMap` is declared to be a map with string keys and int values. The zero value for a map is `nil`. A nil map has a length of 0. Attempting to read a nil map always returns the zero value for the map’s value type. However, attempting to write to a nil map variable causes a panic.

```go
var nilMap map[string]int
fmt.Println(nilMap["aa"]) // 0
nilMap["bb"] = 12 // panic: assignment to entry in nil map
```

You can use a `:=` declaration to create a map variable by assigning it a **map literal**, In this case, you are using an **empty map literal**. This is not the same as a **nil map**. It has a length of 0, but you can read and write to a map assigned an empty map literal.

```go
	Map := map[string]int{}
	fmt.Println(Map["aa"]) // 0
	Map["bb"] = 12
	fmt.Println(Map)  // map[bb:12]
```

If you know how many key-value pairs you intend to put in the map but don’t know the exact values, you can use `make` to create a map with a default size:

```go
ages := make(map[int][]string, 10)
```

The key for a map can be any comparable type. This means you cannot use a slice or a map as the key for a map.

When should you use a map, and when should you use a slice? You should use slices for lists of data when the data should be processed sequentially or the order of the elements is important. Maps are useful when you need to organize values using something other than an increasing integer value, such as a name.

However, you sometimes do need to find out if a key is in a map. Go provides the **comma ok idiom** to tell the difference between a key that’s associated with a zero value and a key that’s not in the map:

```go
m := map[string]int{     
  "hello": 5,     
  "world": 0, 
} 
v, ok := m["hello"] 
fmt.Println(v, ok)   // 5 true
v, ok = m["world"] 
fmt.Println(v, ok)   // 0 true
v, ok = m["goodbye"] 
fmt.Println(v, ok)   // 0 false
```

Key-value pairs are removed from a map via the built-in `delete` function:

```go
m := map[string]int{     
  "hello": 5,     
  "world": 10, 
} 
delete(m, "hello")
```

The `delete` function takes a map and a key and then removes the key-value pair with the specified key. If the key isn’t present in the map or if the map is `nil`, nothing happens. The `delete` function doesn’t return a value.

The `clear` function also works on maps. A cleared map has its length set to zero, **unlike a cleared slice**. The following code:

```go
m := map[string]int{     
  "hello": 5,     
  "world": 10, 
} 
fmt.Println(m, len(m))  // map[hello:5 world:10] 2
clear(m) 
fmt.Println(m, len(m))  // map[] 0
```

Two functions in the package are useful for comparing if two maps are equal, `maps.Equal` and `maps.EqualFunc`. They are analogous to the `slices.Equal` and `slices.EqualFunc` functions.

Go doesn’t include a set, but you can use a map to simulate some of its features. Use the key of the map for the type that you want to put into the set and use a bool for the value.

```go
intSet := map[int]bool{} 
vals := []int{5, 10, 2, 5, 8, 7, 3, 9, 1, 2, 10} 
for _, v := range vals {     
  intSet[v] = true 
} 
fmt.Println(len(vals), len(intSet))   // 11 8
fmt.Println(intSet[5])  	 // true
fmt.Println(intSet[500])   // false
if intSet[100] {
	fmt.Println("100 is in the set")
}
```

Some people prefer to use `struct{}` for the value when a map is being used to implement a set. The advantage is that an empty struct uses zero bytes, while a boolean uses one byte. The disadvantage is that using a `struct{}` makes your code clumsier. You have a less obvious assignment, and you need to use the **comma ok idiom** to check if a value is in the set:

```go
intSet := map[int]struct{}{} 
vals := []int{5, 10, 2, 5, 8, 7, 3, 9, 1, 2, 10} 
for _, v := range vals {     
  intSet[v] = struct{}{} 
} 
if _, ok := intSet[5]; ok {     
  fmt.Println("5 is in the set") 
}
```

Unless you have very large sets, the difference in memory usage will not likely be significant enough to outweigh the disadvantages.

##### Structs

When you have related data that you want to group together, you should define a `struct`.

Go doesn’t have classes, because it doesn’t have inheritance. This doesn’t mean that Go doesn’t have some of the features of object-oriented languages it just does things a little differently.

A struct type is defined with the keyword `type`, the name of the struct type, the keyword `struct`, and a pair of braces (`{}`).

Also note that unlike in map literals, no commas separate the fields in a struct declaration. You can define a struct type inside or outside of a function. A struct type that’s defined within a function can be used only within that function.

```go
type person struct {     
  name string     
  age  int
  pet  string 
}
```

Once a struct type is declared, you can define variables of that type:

```go
var fred person
```

A **struct literal** can be assigned to a variable as well:

```go
bob := person{}
```

Unlike maps, there is no difference between assigning an empty struct literal and not assigning a value at all. Both initialize all fields in the struct to their zero values. There are two styles for a nonempty struct literal. First, a struct literal can be specified as a comma-separated list of values for the fields inside of braces:

```go
julia := person{     
  "Julia",     
  40,     
  "cat", 
}
```

When using this struct literal format, a value for every field in the struct must be specified, and the values are assigned to the fields in the order they were declared in the struct definition.

The second struct literal style looks like the map literal style:

```go
beth := person{     
  age:  30, 
  name: "Beth", 
}
```

You use the names of the fields in the struct to specify the values. This style has some advantages. It allows you to specify the fields in any order, and you don’t need to provide a value for all fields. Any field not specified is set to its zero value.

A field in a struct is accessed with dot notation:

```go
bob.name = "Bob" 
fmt.Println(bob.name)
```

Just as you use brackets for both reading and writing to a map, you use dotted notation for reading and writing to struct fields.

You can also declare that a variable implements a struct type without first giving the struct type a name. This is called an **anonymous struct**:

```go
var person struct {     
  name string     
  age  int     
  pet  string 
} 

person.name = "bob" 
person.age = 50 
person.pet = "dog" 

pet := struct {     
  name string     
  kind string 
}{     
  name: "Fido",     
  kind: "dog", 
}
```

You might wonder when it’s useful to have a data type that’s associated only with a single instance. Anonymous structs are handy in two common situations. The first is when you translate external data into a struct or a struct into external data (like JSON or Protocol Buffers). This is called **unmarshaling** and **marshaling** data, respectively. Writing tests is another place where anonymous structs pop up.

Whether a struct is comparable depends on the struct’s fields. Structs that are entirely composed of comparable types are comparable; those with slice or map fields are not (as you will see in later chapters, function and channel fields also prevent a struct from being comparable).

Just as Go doesn’t allow comparisons between variables of different primitive types, Go doesn’t allow comparisons between variables that represent structs of different types. Go does allow you to perform a type conversion from one struct type to another **if the fields of both structs have the same names, order, and types**.

you can use a type conversion to convert an instance of `firstPerson` to `secondPerson`, but you can’t use `==` to compare an instance of `firstPerson` and an instance of `secondPerson`, because they are different types. 

```go
type firstPerson struct {     
  name string     
  age  int 
}

type secondPerson struct {     
  name string     
  age  int 
}
```

You can’t convert an instance of `firstPerson` to `thirdPerson`, because the fields are in a different order:

```go
type thirdPerson struct {     
  age  int     
  name string 
}
```

You can’t convert an instance of `firstPerson` to `fourthPerson` because the field names don’t match:

```go
type fourthPerson struct {     
  firstName string     
  age       int 
}
```

Finally, you can’t convert an instance of `firstPerson` to `fifthPerson` because there’s an additional field:

```go
type fifthPerson struct {     
  name          string     
  age           int     
  favoriteColor string 
}
```

Anonymous structs add a small twist: if two struct variables are being compared and at least one has a type that’s an anonymous struct, you can compare them without a type conversion if the fields of both structs have the same names, order, and types. You can also assign between named and anonymous struct types if the fields of both structs have the same names, order, and types:

```go
type firstPerson struct {     
  name string     
  age  int 
} 
f := firstPerson{     
  name: "Bob",     
  age:  50, 
} 
var g struct {     
  name string     
  age  int 
} 

// compiles -- can use = and == between identical named and anonymous structs 
g = f 
fmt.Println(f == g)  // true
```









