Variables, constants, types, and functions declared outside of any functions are placed in the package block. You’ve used `import` statements in your programs to gain access to printing and math functions. They define names for other packages that are valid for the file that contains the import statement. These names are in the file block. All the variables defined at the top level of a function (including the parameters to a function) are in a block. Within a function, every set of braces (`{}`) defines another block. What happens when you have a declaration with the same name as an identifier in a containing block? If you do that, you **shadow** the identifier created in the outer block.

```go
func main() {     
  x := 10     
  if x > 5 {         
    fmt.Println(x)  // 10     
    x := 5         
    fmt.Println(x)  // 5
  }     
  fmt.Println(x)    // 10
}
```

A **shadowing variable** is a variable that has the same name as a variable in a containing block. For as long as the shadowing variable exists, you cannot access a shadowed variable. Notice that this `x` didn’t disappear or get reassigned; there was just no way to access it once it was shadowed in the inner block.

I mentioned in the previous chapter that in some situations I avoid using `:=` because it can make it unclear what variables are being used. That’s because it is very easy to accidentally shadow a variable when using `:=`. Remember, you can use `:=` to create and assign to multiple variables at once. Also, not all variables on the lefthand side have to be new for `:=` to be legal. You can use `:=` as long as there is at least one new variable on the lefthand side.

```go
func main() {     
  x := 10     
  if x > 5 {         
    x, y := 5, 20         
    fmt.Println(x, y)  // 5 20   
  }     
  fmt.Println(x)   // 10
}
```

Although there was an existing definition of `x` in an outer block, `x` was still shadowed within the if statement. That’s because `:=` reuses only variables that are declared in the current block. When using `:=`, make sure that you don’t have any variables from an outer scope on the lefthand side unless you intend to shadow them. 

One more block is a little weird: the **universe block**. Remember, Go is a small language with only 25 keywords. What’s interesting is that the built-in types (like `int` and `string`), constants (like `true` and `false`), and functions (like `make` or `close`) aren’t included in that list. Neither is `nil`. So, where are they? Rather than make them keywords, Go considers these **predeclared identifiers** and defines them in the **universe block**, which is the block that contains all other blocks. Because these names are declared in the universe block, they **can be shadowed** in other scopes. You must be very careful to never redefine any identifiers in the universe block. If you accidentally do so, you will get some strange behavior.

Since shadowing is useful in a few instances, `go vet` does not report it as a likely error.

Go uses a `for` statement to loop. What makes Go different from other languages is that `for` is the only looping keyword in the language. Go accomplishes this by using the `for` keyword in four formats: 

- A complete, C-style `for` 
- A condition-only `for` 
- An infinite `for` 
- `for-range`

##### The Complete for Statement

```go
for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {     
  fmt.Println(i) 
}
```

You should remember two important details about the initialization section. First, you must use `:=` to initialize the variables; `var` is not legal here. Second, just as variable declarations in if statements, you can shadow a variable here.

##### The Condition-Only for Statement

```go
i := 1 
for i < 100 {         
  fmt.Println(i)         
  i = i * 2 
}
```

##### The Infinite for Statement

```go
for {         
  fmt.Println("Hello")     
}
```

Go has no equivalent of the `do` keyword in Java, C, and JavaScript. If you want to iterate at least once, the cleanest way is to use an infinite for loop that ends with an if statement:

```go
for {     
  // things to do in the loop     
  if !CONDITION {         
    break     
  } 
}
```

Note that the condition has a leading `!` to negate the condition. The Go code is specifying how to exit the loop, while the Java code specifies how to stay in it.

##### The for-range Statement

```go
evenVals := []int{2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12} 
for i, v := range evenVals {     
  fmt.Println(i, v) 
}
```

When looping over an array, slice, or string, an `i` for index is commonly used. When iterating through a map, `k` (for key) is used instead. If you don’t need to access the key, use an underscore (`_`) as the variable’s name. This tells Go to ignore the value. What if you want the key but don’t want the value? In this situation, Go allows you to just leave off the second variable.

In earlier Go versions, the iteration order for keys in a map was usually (but not always) the same if you inserted the same items into a map. This caused two problems: 

- People would write code that assumed that the order was fixed, and this code would break at weird times.
- If maps always hash items to the exact same values, and you know that a server is storing user data in a map, you can slow down a server with an attack called **Hash DoS** by sending it specially crafted data with keys that all hash to the same bucket.

To prevent both of these problems, the Go team made two changes to the map implementation. First, they modified the hash algorithm for maps to include a random number that’s generated every time a map variable is created. Next, they made the order of a for-range iteration over a map vary a bit each time the map is looped over. These two changes make it far harder to implement a **Hash DoS attack**. This rule has one exception. To make it easier to debug and log maps, the formatting functions (like `fmt.Println`) always output maps with their keys in ascending sorted order.

As I mentioned earlier, you can also use a string with a for-range loop:

```go
samples := []string{"hello", "apple_π!"} 
for _, sample := range samples {     
  for i, r := range sample {         
    fmt.Println(i, r, string(r))     
  }     
  fmt.Println() 
}

/*
0 104 h
1 101 e
2 108 l
3 108 l
4 111 o

0 97 a
1 112 p
2 112 p
3 108 l
4 101 e
5 95 _
6 960 π
8 33 !
*/
```

Notice two things about this output. First, notice that the first column skips the number 7. Second, the value at position 6 is 960. That’s far larger than what can fit in a byte. What you are seeing is special behavior from iterating over a string with a for-range loop. It iterates over the runes, not the bytes. Whenever a for-range loop encounters a multibyte rune in a string, it converts the UTF-8 representation into a single 32-bit number and assigns it to the value. The offset is incremented by the number of bytes in the rune. If the for-range loop encounters a byte that doesn’t represent a valid UTF-8 value, the **Unicode replacement character** (hex value `0xfffd`) is returned instead.

You should be aware that each time the for-range loop iterates over your compound type, it copies the value from the compound type to the value variable. Modifying the value variable will not modify the value in the compound type:

```go
evenVals := []int{2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12} 
for _, v := range evenVals {     
  v *= 2 
} 
fmt.Println(evenVals)   // [2 4 6 8 10 12]
```

In versions of Go before 1.22, the value variable is created once and is reused on each iteration through the for loop. Since Go 1.22, the default behavior is to create a new index and value variable on each iteration through the for loop. This change may not seem important, but it prevents a common bug. Because this is a backward-breaking change (even if it is a change that eliminates a common bug), you can control whether to enable this behavior by specifying the Go version in the go directive in the `go.mod` file for your module.

### switch

By default, cases in switch statements in Go don’t fall through. For the sake of completeness, Go does include a `fallthrough` keyword, which lets one case continue on to the next one. 

Even though you don’t need to put a `break` statement at the end of each case clause, you can use them when you want to exit early from a case. However, the need for a break statement might indicate that you are doing something too complicated. Consider refactoring your code to remove it.

Go allows you to leave out parts from a for statement’s declaration, you can write a `switch` statement that doesn’t specify the value that you’re comparing against. This is called a **blank switch**. A regular `switch` only allows you to check a value for equality. A **blank switch** allows you to use any boolean comparison for each `case`:

```go
words := []string{"hi", "salutations", "hello"} 
for _, word := range words {     
  switch wordLen := len(word); {     
    case wordLen < 5:         
    fmt.Println(word, "is a short word!")     
    case wordLen > 10:         
    fmt.Println(word, "is a long word!")     
    default:         
    fmt.Println(word, "is exactly the right length.")     
  } 
}
```





















