##### Simulating Named and Optional Parameters

Before getting to the unique function features that Go has, I’ll mention two that Go **doesn’t have**: named and optional input parameters. With one exception that I will cover in the next section, you must supply all the parameters for a function. If you want to emulate named and optional parameters, define a struct that has fields that match the desired parameters, and pass the struct to your function.

```go
// Example 5-1. Using a struct to simulate named parameters

type MyFuncOpts struct {     
  FirstName string     
  LastName  string     
  Age       int 
}

func MyFunc(opts MyFuncOpts) error {
  // do something here 
} 

func main() {     
  MyFunc(MyFuncOpts{         
    LastName: "Patel",         
    Age:      50,     
  })     
  MyFunc(MyFuncOpts{         
    FirstName: "Joe",         
    LastName:  "Smith",     
  }) 
}
```

In practice, not having named and optional parameters isn’t a limitation. A function shouldn’t have more than a few parameters, and named and optional parameters are mostly useful when a function has many inputs. If you find yourself in that situation, your function is quite possibly too complicated.

##### Variadic Input Parameters and Slices

Go supports **variadic** parameters. The variadic parameter must be the last (or only) parameter in the input parameter list. You indicate it with three dots (`...`) before the type. Since the variadic parameter is converted to a slice, you can supply a slice as the input. However, you must put three dots (`...`) after the variable or slice literal.

```go
func addTo(base int, vals ...int) []int {
	out := make([]int, 0, len(vals))
	for _, v := range vals {
		out = append(out, base+v)
	}
	return out
}

func main() {
	fmt.Println(addTo(3))
	fmt.Println(addTo(3, 2))
	fmt.Println(addTo(3, 2, 4, 6, 8))
	a := []int{4, 3}
	fmt.Println(addTo(3, a...))
	fmt.Println(addTo(3, []int{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}...))
}

/*
[]
[5]
[5 7 9 11]
[7 6]
[4 5 6 7 8]
*/
```

##### Multiple Return Values

The first difference that you’ll see between Go and other languages is that Go allows for multiple return values.

There are a few changes to support multiple return values. When a Go function returns multiple values, the types of the return values are listed in parentheses, separated by commas. Also, if a function returns multiple values, you must return all of them, separated by commas. Don’t put parentheses around the returned values; that’s a compile-time error. By convention, the error is always the last (or only) value returned from a function.

In Python, you can assign all the values returned to a single variable or to multiple variables. That’s not how Go works. You must assign each value returned from a function. If you try to assign multiple return values to one variable, you get a compile-time error.

##### Named Return Values

```go
func divAndRemainder(numerator int, denominator int) (result int, remainder int,
	err error) {
	if denominator == 0 {
		err = errors.New("cannot divide by zero")
		return result, remainder, err
	}
	result, remainder = numerator/denominator, numerator%denominator
	return result, remainder, err
}
```

You must surround named return values with parentheses, even if there is only a single return value. Named return values are initialized to their zero values when created. This means that you can return them before any explicit use or assignment.

One important thing to note: the name that’s used for a named returned value is local to the function; it doesn’t enforce any name outside of the function. It is perfectly legal to assign the return values to variables of different names:

While named return values can sometimes help clarify your code, they do have some potential corner cases. First is the problem of shadowing.

##### Blank Returns—Never Use These!

If you use named return values, you need to be aware of one severe misfeature in Go: blank (sometimes called naked) returns. If you have named return values, you can just write return without specifying the values that are returned. This returns the last values assigned to the named return values.

```go
func divAndRemainder(num, denom int) (result int, remainder int, err error) {     
  if denom == 0 {         
    err = errors.New("cannot divide by zero")         
    return     
  }     
  result, remainder = num/denom, num%denom     
  return 
}
```

However, most experienced Go developers consider blank returns a bad idea because they make it harder to understand data flow. Good software is clear and readable; it’s obvious what is happening. When you use a blank return, the reader of your code needs to scan back through the program to find the last value assigned to the return parameters to see what is actually being returned.

##### Functions Are Values

Just as in many other languages, functions in Go are values. The type of a function is built out of the keyword `func` and the types of the parameters and return values. This combination is called the **signature** of the function.

Since functions are values, you can declare a function variable:

```go
var myFuncVariable func(string) int
```

`myFuncVariable` can be assigned any function that has a single parameter of type `string` and returns a single value of type `int`.

The default zero value for a function variable is `nil`. Attempting to run a function variable with a nil value results in a panic.

Having functions as values allows you to do some clever things, such as build a simple calculator using functions as values in a map.

```go
func add(i int, j int) int { return i + j } 
func sub(i int, j int) int { return i - j } 
func mul(i int, j int) int { return i * j } 
func div(i int, j int) int { return i / j }

var opMap = map[string]func(int, int) int{     
  "+": add,     
  "-": sub,     
  "*": mul,     
  "/": div, 
}

func main() {     
  expressions := [][]string{         
    {"2", "+", "3"},         
    {"2", "-", "3"},         
    {"2", "*", "3"},         
    {"2", "/", "3"},         
    {"2", "%", "3"},         
    {"two", "+", "three"},         
    {"5"},     
  }     
  for _, expression := range expressions {         
    if len(expression) != 3 {             
      fmt.Println("invalid expression:", expression)             
      continue         
    }         
    p1, err := strconv.Atoi(expression[0])         
    if err != nil {             
      fmt.Println(err)             
      continue         
    }         
    op := expression[1]         
    opFunc, ok := opMap[op]         
    if !ok {             
      fmt.Println("unsupported operator:", op)             
      continue         
    }         
    p2, err := strconv.Atoi(expression[2])         
    if err != nil {             
      fmt.Println(err)             
      continue         
    }         
    result := opFunc(p1, p2)         
    fmt.Println(result)    
  } 
}
```

##### Function Type Declarations

Just as you can use the `type` keyword to define a struct, you can use it to define a function type too

```go
type opFuncType func(int,int) int
```

You can then rewrite the opMap declaration to look like this:

```go
var opMap = map[string]opFuncType {     
  // same as before 
}
```

You don’t have to modify the functions at all. Any function that has two input parameters of type `int` and a single return value of type `int` automatically meets the type and can be assigned as a value in the map.

What’s the advantage of declaring a function type? One use is documentation. It’s useful to give something a name if you are going to refer to it multiple times.

##### Anonymous Functions

You can not only assign functions to variables, but also define new functions within a function and assign them to variables.

```go
func main() {     
  f := func(j int) {         
    fmt.Println("printing", j, "from inside of an anonymous function")     
  }    
  for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {   
    f(i)   
  }
}
```

Inner functions are **anonymous**; they don’t have a name. You declare an anonymous function with the keyword `func` immediately followed by the input parameters, the return values, and the opening brace. It is a compile-time error to try to put a function name between `func` and the input parameters.

You don’t have to assign an anonymous function to a variable. You can write them inline and call them immediately. The previous program can be rewritten into this:

```go
func main() {    
  for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {      
  	func(j int) {      
   	 fmt.Println("printing", j, "from inside of an anonymous function")   
 	 }(i)    
  }
}
```

Now, this is not something that you would normally do. If you are declaring and executing an anonymous function immediately, you might as well get rid of the anonymous function and just call the code. However, declaring anonymous functions without assigning them to variables is useful in two situations: `defer` statements and launching goroutines.

Since you can declare variables at the package scope, you can also declare package scope variables that are assigned anonymous functions:

```go
var ( 
  add = func(i, j int) int { return i + j }   
  sub = func(i, j int) int { return i - j }  
  mul = func(i, j int) int { return i * j }  
  div = func(i, j int) int { return i / j } 
) 

func main() {  
  x := add(2, 3)   
  fmt.Println(x)
}
```

Unlike a normal function definition, you can assign a new value to a package-level anonymous function:

```go
func main() {  
  x := add(2, 3) 
  fmt.Println(x)  
  changeAdd()   
  y := add(2, 3)  
  fmt.Println(y) 
} 

func changeAdd() {   
  add = func(i, j int) int { return i + j + j }
}
```

Before using a package-level anonymous function, be very sure you need this capabil‐ity. Package-level state should be immutable to make data flow easier to understand. If a function’s meaning changes while a program is running, it becomes difficult to understand not just how data flows, but how it is processed.

##### Closures

Functions declared inside functions are special; they are **closures**. This is a computer science word that means that functions declared inside functions are able to access and modify variables declared in the outer function.

```go
func main() {   
  a := 20  
  f := func() { 
    fmt.Println(a)  
    a = 30   
  }    
  f()              // 20
  fmt.Println(a)   // 30
}
```

The anonymous function assigned to f can read and write a, even though a is not passed in to the function.

Just as with any inner scope, you can shadow a variable inside a closure:

```go
func main() { 
  a := 20 
  f := func() { 
    fmt.Println(a)  
    a := 30     
    fmt.Println(a) 
  }   
  f()  							// 20  30
  fmt.Println(a) 		// 20
}
```

Using `:=` instead of `=` inside the closure creates a new `a` that ceases to exist when the closure exits. When working with inner functions, be careful to use the correct assignment operator, especially when multiple variables are on the lefthand side.

This inner function and closure stuff might not seem all that useful at first. What benefit do you get from making mini-functions within a larger function? Why does Go have this feature?

One thing that closures allow you to do is to limit a function’s scope. If a function is going to be called from only one other function, but it’s called multiple times, you can use an inner function to “hide” the called function. This reduces the number of declarations at the package level, which can make it easier to find an unused name. If you have a piece of logic that is repeated multiple times within a function, a closure can be used to remove that repetition.

Closures really become interesting when they are **passed to other functions or returned from a function**. They allow you to take the variables within your function and use those values outside of your function.

##### Passing Functions as Parameters

```go
type Person struct {  
  FirstName string  
  LastName  string 
  Age       int 
} 

people := []Person{   
  {"Pat", "Patterson", 37},   
  {"Tracy", "Bobdaughter", 23},  
  {"Fred", "Fredson", 18},
} 
fmt.Println(people)

// sort by last name 
sort.Slice(people, func(i, j int) bool { 
  return people[i].LastName < people[j].LastName
}) 
fmt.Println(people)

// sort by age 
sort.Slice(people, func(i, j int) bool { 
  return people[i].Age < people[j].Age 
}) 
fmt.Println(people)
```

The closure that’s passed to `sort.Slice` has two parameters, i and j, but within the closure, people is used, so you can sort it by the `LastName` field. In computer science terms, `people` is **captured** by the closure.

##### Returning Functions from Functions

```go
func makeMult(base int) func(int) int {  
  return func(factor int) int {   
    return base * factor 
  } } 

func main() {  
  twoBase := makeMult(2)    
  threeBase := makeMult(3)   
  for i := 0; i < 3; i++ {   
    fmt.Println(twoBase(i), threeBase(i))  
  } 
}

/*
0 0
2 3
4 6
*/
```

If you spend any time with programmers who use functional programming languages like Haskell, you might hear the term **higher-order functions**. That’s a fancy way to say that a function has a function for an input parameter or a return value. As a Go developer, you are as cool as they are!

##### defer

Programs often create temporary resources, like files or network connections, that need to be cleaned up. This cleanup has to happen, no matter how many exit points a function has, or whether a function completed successfully or not. In Go, the cleanup code is attached to the function with the `defer` keyword.

```go
func main() {  
  if len(os.Args) < 2 {
    log.Fatal("no file specified")  
  }    
  f, err := os.Open(os.Args[1])   
  if err != nil {     
    log.Fatal(err)   
  }    
  defer f.Close()  
  data := make([]byte, 2048)   
  for {   
    count, err := f.Read(data) 
    os.Stdout.Write(data[:count])    
    if err != nil {     
      if err != io.EOF {     
        log.Fatal(err)      
      }        
      break   
    }   
  } 
}
```

First, you make sure that a filename was specified on the command line by checking the length of `os.Args`, a slice in the `os` package. The first value in `os.Args` is the name of the program. The remaining values are the arguments passed to the program. You check that the length of `os.Args` is at least 2 to determine whether the argument to the program was provided. If it wasn’t, use the `Fatal` function in the `log` package to print a message and exit the program. Next, you acquire a read-only file handle with the `Open` function in the `os` package. The second value that’s returned by `Open` is an error. If there’s a problem opening the file, you print the error message and exit the program.

Once you know there is a valid file handle, you need to close it after you use it, no matter how you exit the function. To ensure that the cleanup code runs, you use the `defer` keyword, followed by a function or method call. In this case, you use the `Close` method on the file variable. Normally, a function call runs immediately, but `defer` delays the invocation until the surrounding function exits.

You read from a file handle by passing a slice of bytes into the `Read` method on a file variable. `Read` returns the number of bytes that were read into the slice and an error. If an error occurs, you check whether it’s an end-of-file marker. If you are at the end of the file, you use `break` to exit the for loop. For all other errors, you report it and exit immediately, using `log.Fatal`.

You should know a few more things about `defer`. First, you can use a function, method, or closure with `defer`. You can defer multiple functions in a Go function. They run in last-in, first-out (**LIFO**) order; the last defer registered runs first. The code within `defer` functions runs after the return statement. As I mentioned, you can supply a function with input parameters to a defer. The input parameters are evaluated immediately and their values are stored until the function runs.

```go
func deferExample() int {  
  a := 10   
  defer func(val int) {    
    fmt.Println("first:", val)  
  }(a)   
  a = 20   
  defer func(val int) {   
    fmt.Println("second:", val)    
  }(a)  
  a = 30  
  fmt.Println("exiting:", a)   
  return a
}

/*
exiting: 30 
second: 20 
first: 10
*/
```

You can supply a function that returns values to a defer, but there’s no way to read those values:

```go
func example() {   
  defer func() int {   
    return 2 // there's no way to read this value  
  }() 
}
```

You might be wondering whether there’s a way for a deferred function to examine or modify the return values of its surrounding function. There is, and it’s the best reason to use **named return values**. It allows your code to take actions based on an error. When I talk about errors in Chapter 9, I will discuss a pattern that uses `defer` to add contextual information to an error returned from a function. Let’s look at a way to handle **database transaction cleanup** using **named return values** and `defer`:

```go
func DoSomeInserts(ctx context.Context, db *sql.DB, value1, value2 string) (err error) {  
  tx, err := db.BeginTx(ctx, nil)  
  if err != nil { 
    return err   
  }    
  defer func() { 
    if err == nil {    
      err = tx.Commit()   
    }      
    if err != nil {  
      tx.Rollback()   
    }   
  }()  
  _, err = tx.ExecContext(ctx, "INSERT INTO FOO (val) values $1", value1)
  if err != nil {      
    return err 
  }    
  // use tx to do more database inserts here   
  return nil
}
```

In the example function, you create a transaction to do a series of database inserts. If any of them fails, you want to roll back (not modify the database). If all of them succeed, you want to commit (store the database changes). You use a closure with defer to check whether `err` has been assigned a value. If it hasn’t, you run `tx.Commit`, which could also return an error. If it does, the value `err` is modified. If any database interaction returned an error, you call `tx.Rollback`.

A common pattern in Go is for a function that allocates a resource to also return a closure that cleans up the resource.

```go
func getFile(name string) (*os.File, func(), error) { 
  file, err := os.Open(name)   
  if err != nil {   
    return nil, nil, err  
  }    
  return file, func() {  
    file.Close() 
  }, nil 
}
```

Now in `main`, you use the `getFile` function:

```go
f, closer, err := getFile(os.Args[1]) 
if err != nil {   
  log.Fatal(err) 
} 
defer closer()
```

Because Go doesn’t allow unused variables, returning the closer from the function means that the program will not compile if the function is not called. That reminds the user to use `defer`. As covered earlier, you put parentheses after `closer` when you `defer` it.

##### Go Is Call by Value

You might hear people say that Go is a **call-by-value** language and wonder what that means. It means that when you supply a variable for a parameter to a function, Go always makes a copy of the value of the variable.

```go
type person struct { 
  age  int 
  name string 
}

func modifyFails(i int, s string, p person) {  
  i = i * 2  
  s = "Goodbye"   
  p.name = "Bob" 
}

func main() { 
  p := person{} 
  i := 2   
  s := "Hello"  
  modifyFails(i, s, p)   
  fmt.Println(i, s, p)   // 2 Hello {0 }
}
```

I included the `person` struct to show that this isn’t true just for primitive types. If you have programming experience in Java, JavaScript, Python, or Ruby, you might find the struct behavior strange. After all, those languages let you modify the fields in an object when you pass an object as a parameter to a function. The reason for the difference is something I will cover when I talk about pointers.

The behavior is a little different for **maps** and **slices**.

```go
func modMap(m map[int]string) {  
  m[2] = "hello"  
  m[3] = "goodbye" 
  delete(m, 1) 
} 

func modSlice(s []int) { 
  for k, v := range s {  
    s[k] = v * 2   
  }   
  s = append(s, 10) }

func main() {  
  m := map[int]string{   
    1: "first", 
    2: "second",  
  }    
  modMap(m) 
  fmt.Println(m)     // map[2:hello 3:goodbye]
  s := []int{1, 2, 3}   
  modSlice(s)    
  fmt.Println(s)    // [2 4 6]
}
```

For the map, it’s easy to explain what happens: any changes made to a map parameter are reflected in the variable passed into the function. For a slice, it’s more complicated. You can modify any element in the slice, but you can’t lengthen the slice. This is true for maps and slices that are passed directly into functions as well as map and slice fields in structs.

This program leads to the question: why do maps and slices behave differently than other types? It’s because maps and slices are both implemented with **pointers**. Every type in Go is a value type. It’s just that sometimes the value is a pointer.

Call by value is one reason that Go’s limited support for constants is only a minor handicap. Since variables are passed by value, you can be sure that calling a function doesn’t modify the variable whose value was passed in (*unless the variable is a slice or map*). In general, this is a good thing. It makes it easier to understand the flow of data through your program when functions don’t modify their input parameters and instead return newly computed values.









