```go
func calcRemainderAndMod(numerator, denominator int) (int, int, error) { 
  if denominator == 0 {  
    return 0, 0, errors.New("denominator is 0")  
  }     
  return numerator / denominator, numerator % denominator, nil 
}
```

A new error is created from a string by calling the `New` function in the `errors` package. Error messages should not be capitalized nor should they end with punctuation or a newline. In most cases, you should set the other return values to their zero values when a non-nil error is returned.

`error` is a built-in interface that defines a single method:

```go
type error interface {  
  Error() string
}
```

Anything that implements this interface is considered an error. The reason you return `nil` from a function to indicate that no error occurred is that `nil` is the zero value for any interface type.

Go’s standard library provides two ways to create an error from a string. The first is the `errors.New` function. It takes in a string and returns an error. This string is returned when you call the `Error` method on the returned error instance. If you pass an error to `fmt.Println`, it calls the `Error` method automatically:

```go
func doubleEven(i int) (int, error) {   
  if i % 2 != 0 {    
    return 0, errors.New("only even numbers are processed") 
  }     
  return i * 2, nil 
} 

func main() {   
  result, err := doubleEven(1)  
  if err != nil {    
    fmt.Println(err) // prints "only even numbers are processed"  
  }   
  fmt.Println(result) 
}
```

The second way is to use the `fmt.Errorf` function. This function allows you to include runtime information in the error message by using the `fmt.Printf` verbs to format an error string. Like `errors.New`, this string is returned when you call the `Error` method on the returned error instance:

```go
func doubleEven(i int) (int, error) {   
  if i % 2 != 0 {   
    return 0, fmt.Errorf("%d isn't an even number", i) 
  }   
  return i * 2, nil
}
```

##### Sentinel Errors

Sentinel errors are one of the few variables that are declared at the package level. By convention, their names start with `Err` (with the notable exception of `io.EOF`). They should be treated as read-only; there’s no way for the Go compiler to enforce this, but it is a programming error to change their value.

Sentinel errors are usually used to indicate that you cannot start or continue pro‐cessing. For example, the standard library includes a package for processing ZIP files, `archive/zip`. This package defines several sentinel errors, including `ErrFormat`, which is returned when data that doesn’t represent a ZIP file is passed in.

```go
func main() {  
  data := []byte("This is not a zip file")  
  notAZipFile := bytes.NewReader(data)  
  _, err := zip.NewReader(notAZipFile, int64(len(data))) 
  if err == zip.ErrFormat {    
    fmt.Println("Told you so")  
  }
}
```

Be sure you need a sentinel error before you define one. Once you define one, it is part of your public API, and you have committed to it being available in all future **backward-compatible** releases. It’s far better to reuse one of the existing ones in the standard library or to define an error type that includes information about the condition that caused the error to be returned. But if you have an error condition that indicates a specific state has been reached in your application where no further processing is possible and no additional information needs to be used to explain the error state, a sentinel error is the correct choice.

##### Errors Are Values

Since error is an interface, you can define your own errors that include additional information for logging or error handling. For example, you might want to include a status code as part of the error to indicate the kind of error that should be reported back to the user.

```go
type Status int

const (  
  InvalidLogin Status = iota + 1  
  NotFound 
)
```

Next, define a StatusErr to hold this value: 

```go
type StatusErr struct {    
  Status    Status  
  Message   string
} 

func (se StatusErr) Error() string {  
  return se.Message 
}
```

Now you can use `StatusErr` to provide more details about what went wrong:

```go
func LoginAndGetData(uid, pwd, file string) ([]byte, error) {  
  token, err := login(uid, pwd)  
  if err != nil {      
    return nil, StatusErr{     
      Status:    InvalidLogin,       
      Message: fmt.Sprintf("invalid credentials for user %s", uid),    
    }
  }    
  data, err := getData(token, file)  
  if err != nil {       
    return nil, StatusErr{  
      Status:    NotFound,      
      Message: fmt.Sprintf("file %s not found", file),   
    }   
  } 
  return data, nil
}
```

If you are using your own error type, be sure you don’t return an uninitialized instance.

```go
func GenerateErrorBroken(flag bool) error {  
  var genErr StatusErr  
  if flag {     
    genErr = StatusErr{  
      Status: NotFound,   
    }   
  }   
  return genErr 
} 

func main() {  
  err := GenerateErrorBroken(true)     
  fmt.Println(err != nil)   // true
  err = GenerateErrorBroken(false)    
  fmt.Println(err != nil)   // true
}
```

The reason `err` is non-nil is that `error` is an interface. As I discussed earlier, for an interface to be considered nil, both the underlying type and the underlying value must be nil. Whether or not `genErr` is a pointer, the underlying type part of the interface is not nil.

You can fix this in two ways. The most common approach is to explicitly return nil for the error value when a function completes successfully:

```go
func GenerateErrorOKReturnNil(flag bool) error {
  if flag { 
    return StatusErr{    
      Status: NotFound,    
    }   
  }  
  return nil
}
```

Another approach is to make sure that any local variable that holds an `error` is of type `error`:

```go
func GenerateErrorUseErrorVar(flag bool) error {  
  var genErr error  
  if flag {    
    genErr = StatusErr{  
      Status: NotFound,   
    }    
  }  
  return genErr 
}
```

When using custom errors, never define a variable to be of the type of your custom error. Either explicitly return nil when no error occurs or define the variable to be of type `error`.

##### Wrapping Errors

When you preserve an error while adding information, it is called **wrapping the error**. When you have a series of wrapped errors, it is called an **error tree**.

A function in the Go standard library wraps errors, and you’ve already seen it. The `fmt.Errorf` function has a special verb, `%w`. Use this to create an error whose formatted string includes the formatted string of another error and which contains the original error as well.

The standard library also provides a function for unwrapping errors, the `Unwrap` function in the `errors` package. You pass it an error, and it returns the wrapped error if there is one. If there isn’t, it returns nil. Here’s a quick program that demonstrates wrapping with `fmt.Errorf` and unwrapping with `errors.Unwrap`.

```go
func fileChecker(name string) error {
	f, err := os.Open(name)
	if err != nil {
		return fmt.Errorf("in fileChecker: %w", err)
	}
	f.Close()
	return nil
}

func main() {
	err := fileChecker("not_here.txt")
	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println(err)  // in fileChecker: open not_here.txt: no such file or directory
		if wrappedErr := errors.Unwrap(err); wrappedErr != nil {
			fmt.Println(wrappedErr)  // open not_here.txt: no such file or directory
		}
	}
}
```

You don’t usually call `errors.Unwrap` directly. Instead, you use `errors.Is` and `errors.As` to find a specific wrapped error.

If you want to wrap an error with your custom error type, your error type needs to implement the method `Unwrap`. This method takes in no parameters and returns an error.

```go
type StatusErr struct {  
  Status  Status  
  Message string   
  Err     error 
} 

func (se StatusErr) Error() string { 
  return se.Message
} 

func (se StatusErr) Unwrap() error { 
  return se.Err
}
```

Now you can use `StatusErr` to wrap underlying errors:

```go
func LoginAndGetData(uid, pwd, file string) ([]byte, error) {  
  token, err := login(uid,pwd)  
  if err != nil {   
    return nil, StatusErr {    
      Status: InvalidLogin,     
      Message: fmt.Sprintf("invalid credentials for user %s",uid),     
      Err: err,    
    }  
  } 
  data, err := getData(token, file)   
  if err != nil {    
    return nil, StatusErr {     
      Status: NotFound,         
      Message: fmt.Sprintf("file %s not found",file),       
      Err: err,      
    }    
  } 
  return data, nil
}

func main() {
	data, err = LoginAndGetData("admin", "admin", "chicken_recipe.txt")
	fmt.Println(string(data), err, errors.Unwrap(err))
}
```

Not all errors need to be wrapped. A library can return an error that means processing cannot continue, but the error message contains implementation details that aren’t needed in other parts of your program. In this situation, it is perfectly acceptable to create a brand-new error and return that instead.

If you want to create a new error that contains the message from another error, but don’t want to wrap it, use `fmt.Errorf` to create an error but use the `%v` verb instead of `%w`:

```go
err := internalFunction() 
if err != nil {   
  return fmt.Errorf("internal failure: %v", err)
}
```

##### Wrapping Multiple Errors

Sometimes a function generates multiple errors that should be returned. Since the standard function signature returns `error` and not `[]error`, you need to merge multiple errors into a single error. That’s what the `errors.Join` function is for:

```go
type Person struct {  
  FirstName string  
  LastName  string  
  Age       int 
}

func ValidatePerson(p Person) error {  
  var errs []error   
  if len(p.FirstName) == 0 {     
    errs = append(errs, errors.New("field FirstName cannot be empty"))  
  }   
  if len(p.LastName) == 0 {   
    errs = append(errs, errors.New("field LastName cannot be empty")) 
  }   
  if p.Age < 0 {  
    errs = append(errs, errors.New("field Age cannot be negative"))  
  }    
  if len(errs) > 0 {   
    return errors.Join(errs...)   
  }   
  return nil
}

func main() {
	err := ValidatePerson(Person{
		FirstName: "",
		LastName:  "",
		Age:       -1,
	})
	fmt.Println(err)
}

/*
field FirstName cannot be empty
field LastName cannot be empty
field Age cannot be negative
*/
```

Another way to merge multiple errors is to pass multiple `%w` verbs to `fmt.Errorf`:

```go
err1 := errors.New("first error") 
err2 := errors.New("second error") 
err3 := errors.New("third error") 
err := fmt.Errorf("first: %w, second: %w, third: %w", err1, err2, err3)
```

You can implement your own error type that supports multiple wrapped errors. To do so, implement the `Unwrap` method but have it return `[]error` instead of `error`:

```go

type Status int

type StatusErr struct {
	Status  Status
	Message string
}

func (se StatusErr) Error() string {
	return se.Message
}

const (
	InvalidLogin Status = iota + 1
	NotFound
)

type MyError struct {
	Code   int
	Errors []error
}

func (m MyError) Error() string {
	return errors.Join(m.Errors...).Error()
}

func (m MyError) Unwrap() []error {
	return m.Errors
}

func funcThatReturnsAnError() error {
	return MyError{
		Code: 12,
		Errors: []error{
			StatusErr{
				Status:  NotFound,
				Message: "file Not Found",
			},
			errors.New("a simple string error"),
		},
	}
}

func main() {
	var err error
	err = funcThatReturnsAnError()
	switch err := err.(type) {
	case interface{ Unwrap() error }:
		// handle single error
		innerErr := err.Unwrap()
		// process innerErr
		fmt.Println(innerErr)
	case interface{ Unwrap() []error }:
		//handle multiple wrapped errors
		innerErrs := err.Unwrap()
		for _, innerErr := range innerErrs {
			// process each innerErr
			fmt.Println(innerErr)
		}
	default:
		// handle no wrapped error
	}
}
```

##### Is and As

Wrapping errors is a useful way to get additional information about an error, but it introduces problems. If a **sentinel error** is wrapped, you cannot use `==` to check for it, nor can you use a **type assertion** or **type switch** to match a wrapped custom error. Go solves this problem with two functions in the `errors` package, `Is` and `As`.

The `errors.Is` function returns `true` if any error in the error tree matches the provided **sentinel error**.

```go
func fileChecker(name string) error {
	f, err := os.Open(name)
	if err != nil {
		return fmt.Errorf("in fileChecker: %w", err)
	}
	f.Close()
	return nil
}

func main() {
	err := fileChecker("not_here.txt")
	if err != nil {
		if errors.Is(err, os.ErrNotExist) {
			fmt.Println("That file doesn't exist")
		}
	}
}
```

By default, `errors.Is` uses == to compare each wrapped error with the specified error. If this does not work for an error type that you define (for example, if your error is a noncomparable type), implement the `Is` method on your error:

```go
type MyErr struct {  
  Codes []int
} 

func (me MyErr) Error() string { 
  return fmt.Sprintf("codes: %v", me.Codes) 
} 

func (me MyErr) Is(target error) bool {  
  if me2, ok := target.(MyErr); ok {  
    return slices.Equal(me.Codes, me2.Codes)    
  }   
  return false
}
```

The `errors.As` function allows you to check whether a returned `error` (or any error it wraps) matches a specific type. It takes in two parameters. The first is the error being examined, and the second is a pointer to a variable of the type that you are looking for. If the function returns `true`, an error in the **error tree** was found that matched, and that matching error is assigned to the second parameter. If the function returns `false`, no match was found in the error tree.

Use `errors.Is` when you are looking for a specific instance or specific values. Use `errors.As` when you are looking for a specific type.

##### Wrapping Errors with defer

Sometimes you find yourself wrapping multiple errors with the same message:

```go
func DoSomeThings(val1 int, val2 string) (string, error) { 
  val3, err := doThing1(val1)  
  if err != nil {  
    return "", fmt.Errorf("in DoSomeThings: %w", err)   
  }  
  val4, err := doThing2(val2)  
  if err != nil {   
    return "", fmt.Errorf("in DoSomeThings: %w", err)  
  }    
  result, err := doThing3(val3, val4)  
  if err != nil {    
    return "", fmt.Errorf("in DoSomeThings: %w", err)  
  }   
  return result, nil
}
```

You can simplify this code by using defer:

```go
func DoSomeThings(val1 int, val2 string) (_ string, err error) {  
  defer func() {   
    if err != nil {    
      err = fmt.Errorf("in DoSomeThings: %w", err)    
    }  
  }()  
  val3, err := doThing1(val1)   
  if err != nil {    
    return "", err  
  }
  val4, err := doThing2(val2)   
  if err != nil {     
    return "", err   
  }   
  return doThing3(val3, val4) 
}
```

You have to name the return values so that you can refer to `err` in the deferred function. If you name a single return value, you must name all of them, so you use an underscore here for the string return value that isn’t explicitly assigned.

In the `defer` closure, the code checks whether an error was returned. If so, it reassigns the error to a new error that wraps the original error with a message indicating which function detected the error.

##### panic and recover

A **panic** is similar to an `Error` in Java or Python. It is a state generated by the Go runtime whenever it is unable to figure out what should happen next.

As soon as a panic happens, the current function exits immediately, and any `defers` attached to the current function start running. When those `defers` complete, the `defers` attached to the calling function run, and so on, until `main` is reached. The program then exits with a message and a stack trace.

Go provides a way to capture a `panic` to provide a more graceful shutdown or to prevent shutdown at all. The built-in `recover` function is called from within a `defer` to check whether a panic happened. If there was a `panic`, the value assigned to the `panic` is returned. Once a `recover` happens, execution continues normally.

```go
func div60(i int) {
	defer func() {
		if v := recover(); v != nil {
			fmt.Println(v)
		}
	}()
	fmt.Println(60 / i)
}

func main() {
	for _, val := range []int{1, 2, 0, 6} {
		div60(val)
	}
}

/*
60
30
runtime error: integer divide by zero
10
*/
```

While `panic` and `recover` look a lot like exception handling in other languages, they are not intended to be used that way. Reserve panics for fatal situations and use recover as a way to gracefully handle these situations. If your program panics, be careful about trying to continue executing after the panic. You’ll rarely want to keep your program running after a panic occurs. If the panic was triggered because the computer is out of a resource like memory or disk space, the safest thing to do is use `recover` to log the situation to monitoring software and shut down with `os.Exit(1)`.

The reason you don’t rely on `panic` and `recover` is that `recover` doesn’t make clear what could fail. It just ensures that if something fails, you can print out a message and continue.

Using `recover` is recommended in one situation. If you are creating a library for third parties, do not let panics escape the boundaries of your public API. If a panic is possible, a public function should use `recover` to convert the `panic` into an error, return it, and let the calling code decide what to do with them.

##### Getting a Stack Trace from an Error

One of the reasons that new Go developers are tempted to use panic and recover is they want to get a stack trace when something goes wrong. By default, Go doesn’t provide that. As I’ve shown, you can use error wrapping to build a call stack by hand, but some third-party libraries with error types generate those stacks automatically. [Cockroachdb](https://github.com/cockroachdb/errors) provides a third-party library with functions for wrapping errors with stack traces.

By default, the stack trace is not printed out. If you want to see the stack trace, use `fmt.Printf` and the verbose output verb (`%+v`).

When you have a stack trace in your error, the output includes the full path to the file on the computer where the program was compiled. If you don’t want to expose the path, use the `-trimpath` flag when building your code. This replaces the full path with the package.



























