##### Repositories, Modules, and Packages

Library management in Go is based around three concepts: repositories, modules, and packages. A repository is familiar to all developers. It is a place in a version control system where the source code for a project is stored. A module is a bundle of Go source code that’s distributed and versioned as a single unit. Modules are stored in a repository. Modules consist of one or more packages, which are directories of source code. Packages give a module organization and structure.

While you can store more than one module in a repository, it is discouraged. Everything within a module is versioned together. Maintaining two modules in one repository requires you to track separate versions for two different modules in a single repository.

Node.js and Go swap the meanings of the terms: a Node.js package is similar to what Go calls a module, and a Go package is similar to a Node.js module. The terminology certainly can be confusing at first, but as you get more comfortable with Go, the terms will seem more familiar.

Before using code from packages outside the standard library, you need to make sure that you have a properly created module. Every module has a globally unique identifier. This is not unique to Go. Java defines globally unique package declarations by using the reverse domain name convention (`com.companyname.projectname.library`).

In Go, this name is called a **module path**. It is usually based on the repository where the module is stored.

##### Using go.mod

A directory tree of Go source code becomes a module when there’s a valid `go.mod` file in it. Rather than create this file manually, use the subcommands of the `go mod` command to manage modules. The command `go mod init MODULE_PATH` creates the `go.mod` file that makes the current directory the root of a module. The `MODULE_PATH` is the globally unique name that identifies your module. The module path is case-sensitive. To reduce confusion, do not use uppercase letters within it.

Go 1.22 introduces the first backward-breaking change to the language. When using Go 1.22 or later, a `for` loop creates a new index and value variable on each iteration.

```go
func main() { 
  x := []int{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}  
  for _, v := range x {
    fmt.Printf("%p\n", &v)
  }
}
```

The `%p` verb in the `fmt` formatting language returns the memory location of a pointer.

When built using older versions of Go, the program prints out the same memory address five times:

```
0x140000a6018
0x140000a6018
0x140000a6018
0x140000a6018
0x140000a6018
```

Change the value of the go directive in `go.mod` to 1.22 and rebuild and rerun the program. You will now get this output:

```
0x1400000e0e8
0x1400000e100
0x1400000e108
0x1400000e110
0x1400000e118
```

##### Using the internal Package

Sometimes you want to share a function, type, or constant among packages in your module, but you don’t want to make it part of your API. Go supports this via the special `internal` package name.

When you create a package called `internal`, the exported identifiers in that package and its subpackages are accessible only to the direct parent package of internal and the sibling packages of `internal`.

##### Vendoring

To ensure that a module always builds with identical dependencies, some organizations like to keep copies of their dependencies inside their module. This is known as **vendoring**. It’s enabled by running the command `go mod vendor`. This creates a directory called **vendor** at the top level of your module that contains all your module’s dependencies. These dependencies are used in place of the module cache stored on your computer.

If new dependencies are added to `go.mod` or versions of existing dependencies are upgraded with `go get`, you need to run `go mod vendor` again to update the vendor directory. If you forget to do this, `go build`, go run, and `go test` will display an error message and refuse to run.

One reason you might still want to vendor is that it can make building your code faster and more efficient when working with some **CI/CD** (continuous integration/continuous delivery) pipelines. If a pipeline’s build servers are ephemeral, the module cache may not be preserved. Vendoring dependencies allows these pipelines to avoid making multiple network calls to download dependencies every time a build is triggered. The downside is that it dramatically increases the size of your codebase in version control.

Roughly speaking, you can divide open source licenses into two categories: permissive (which allows users of your code to keep their code private) and nonpermissive (which requires users of your code to make their code open source). While the license you choose is up to you, the Go community favors permissive licenses, such as BSD, MIT, and Apache. Since Go compiles third-party code directly into every application, the use of a nonpermissive license like the GPL would require people who use your code to release their code as open source as well. For many organizations, this is not acceptable.



