### Using go run to Try Out Small Programs

Go is a compiled language, which means that before Go code is run, it must be converted into an executable file. This is in contrast to interpreted languages like Python or JavaScript, which allow you to write a quick script to test an idea and execute it immediately. Having that rapid feedback cycle is important, so Go provides similar functionality via the `go run` command. It builds and executes a program in one step.

The `go run` command does, in fact, compile your code into a binary. However, the binary is built in a temporary directory. The `go run` command builds the binary, executes the binary from that temporary directory, and then deletes the binary after your program finishes. This makes the `go run` command useful for testing out small programs or using Go like a scripting language. So, use `go run` when you want to treat a Go program like a script and run the source code immediately.

### Adding Third-Party Tools with go install

By default, `go install` places binaries into the *go/bin* directory within your home directory. Set the `GOBIN` environment variable to change this location. By using `go install`, always be sure to include the `@version` or `@latest` after the name of the package that you are installing.

### Improving Import Formatting with goimports

An enhanced version of `go fmt` called `goimports` also cleans up your import state‐ments.

You can download `goimports` with the command `go install golang.org/x/tools/cmd/goimports@latest`. You run it across your project with this command:

```bash
$ goimports -l -w .
```

The `-l` flag tells `goimports` to print the files with incorrect formatting to the console. The `-w` flag tells `goimports` to modify the files in place. The `.` specifies the files to be scanned: everything in the current directory and all its subdirectories.

### Using Code-Quality Scanners

Many third-party tools can check code style and scan for potential bugs that are missed by `go vet`. These tools are often called **linters**.

#### staticcheck

https://staticcheck.dev/

#### revive

https://revive.run/

#### golangci-lint

https://golangci-lint.run/

### Using govulncheck to Scan for Vulnerable Dependencies

The Go team has released a tool called `govulncheck`. It scans through your dependencies and finds known vulnerabilities in both the standard library and in third-party libraries imported into your module. These vulnerabilities are reported in a [public database](https://pkg.go.dev/vuln/) maintained by the Go team. You can install it with this:

```bash
$ go install golang.org/x/vuln/cmd/govulncheck@latest
```

### Embedding Content into Your Program

https://pkg.go.dev/embed

### Embedding Hidden Files

Including files in a directory tree that start with `.` or `_` is a little complicated. Many operating systems consider these to be hidden files, so they are not included by default when a directory name is specified. However, you can override this behavior in two ways. The first is to put `/*` after the name of a directory you want to embed. This will include all hidden files within the root directory, but it will not include hidden files in its subdirectories. To include all hidden files in all subdirectories, put `all:` before the name of the directory.

```go
import (
	"embed"
	"fmt"
)

//go:embed parent_dir
var noHidden embed.FS

//go:embed parent_dir/*
var parentHiddenOnly embed.FS

//go:embed all:parent_dir
var allHidden embed.FS

func main() {
	checkForHidden("noHidden", noHidden)
	checkForHidden("parentHiddenOnly", parentHiddenOnly)
	checkForHidden("allHidden", allHidden)
}

func checkForHidden(name string, dir embed.FS) {
	fmt.Println(name)
	allFileNames := []string{"parent_dir/.hidden", "parent_dir/child_dir/.hidden"}
	for _, v := range allFileNames {
		_, err := dir.Open(v)
		if err == nil {
			fmt.Println(v, "found")
		}
	}
	fmt.Println()
}

/*
noHidden 

parentHiddenOnly 
parent_dir/.hidden found 

allHidden 
parent_dir/.hidden found 
parent_dir/child_dir/.hidden found
*/
```























