### Reflection Lets You Work with Types at Runtime

But sometimes, relying on only compilation-time information is a limitation. You might need to work with variables at runtime using information that didn’t exist when the program was written. Maybe you’re trying to map data from a file or network request into a variable. In those situations, you need to use reflection. Reflection allows you to examine types at runtime. It also provides the ability to examine, modify, and create variables, functions, and structs at runtime.

This leads to the question of when this functionality is needed. If you look at the Go standard library, you can get an idea. Its uses fall into one of a few general categories: 

- Reading and writing from a database. The database/sql package uses reflection •to send records to databases and read data back.
- Go’s built-in templating libraries, text/template and html/template, use reflec‐•tion to process the values that are passed to the templates.
- The fmt package uses reflection heavily, as all those calls to fmt.Println and •friends rely on reflection to detect the type of the provided parameters.
- The errors package uses reflection to implement errors.Is and errors.As.
- The sort package uses reflection to implement functions that sort and evaluate •slices of any type: sort.Slice, sort.SliceStable, and sort.SliceIsSorted.
- The last main usage of reflection in the Go standard library is for marshaling •and unmarshaling data into JSON and XML, along with the other data formats defined in the various encoding packages. Struct tags (which I will talk about soon) are accessed via reflection, and the fields in structs are read and written using reflection as well.

Most of these examples have one thing in common: they involve accessing and formatting data that is being imported into or exported out of a Go program. You’ll often see reflection used at the boundaries between your program and the outside world.

#### Types, Kinds, and Values

Reflection is built around three core concepts: types, kinds, and values.

```go
var x int 
xt := reflect.TypeOf(x) 
fmt.Println(xt.Name())     // returns int 
f := Foo{} 
ft := reflect.TypeOf(f) 
fmt.Println(ft.Name())     // returns Foo 
xpt := reflect.TypeOf(&x) 
fmt.Println(xpt.Name())    // returns an empty string
```

For a struct, the name of the struct is returned. Some types, like a slice or a pointer, don’t have names; in those cases, Name returns an empty string.

The Kind method on reflect.Type returns a value of type reflect.Kind, which is a constant that says what the type is made of—a slice, a map, a pointer, a struct, an interface, a string, an array, a function, an int, or some other primitive type. The difference between the kind and the type can be tricky to understand. Remember this rule: if you define a struct named Foo, the kind is reflect.Struct and the type is “Foo.”

```go
var x int 
xpt := reflect.TypeOf(&x) 
fmt.Println(xpt.Name())        // returns an empty string 
fmt.Println(xpt.Kind())        // returns reflect.Pointer 
fmt.Println(xpt.Elem().Name()) // returns "int" 
fmt.Println(xpt.Elem().Kind()) // returns reflect.Int
```

```go
type Foo struct {  
  A int    `myTag:"value"`   
  B string `myTag:"value2"`
}

var f Foo 
ft := reflect.TypeOf(f) 
for i := 0; i < ft.NumField(); i++ {  
  curField := ft.Field(i)   
  fmt.Println(curField.Name, curField.Type.Name(), curField.Tag.Get("myTag")) 
}

// A int value 
// B string value2
```

I’ll start by demonstrating how to read your values back out of a reflect.Value. The Interface method returns the value of the variable as any. When you put the value returned by Interface into a variable, you have to use a type assertion to get back to a usable type:

```go
s := []string{"a", "b", "c"} 
sv := reflect.ValueOf(s)        // sv is of type reflect.Value 
s2 := sv.Interface().([]string) // s2 is of type []string
```

You can use reflection to set the value of a variable as well, but it’s a three-step process.

First, you pass a pointer to the variable into reflect.ValueOf. This returns a reflect.Value that represents the pointer:

```go
i := 10 
iv := reflect.ValueOf(&i)
```

Next, you need to get to the actual value to set it. You use the Elem method on reflect.Value to get to the value pointed to by the pointer that was passed into reflect.ValueOf.

```go
ivv := iv.Elem()
```

Finally, you get to the actual method that’s used to set the value. Just as there are special-case methods for reading primitive types, there are special-case methods for setting primitive types: SetBool, SetInt, SetFloat, SetString, and SetUint.

```go
ivv.SetInt(20) 
fmt.Println(i) // prints 20
```

The reason you need to pass a pointer to reflect.ValueOf to change the value of the input parameter is that it is just like any other function in Go. As I discussed in “Pointers Indicate Mutable Parameters” on page 125, you use a parameter of a pointer type to indicate that you want to modify the value of the parameter. When you modify the value, you dereference the pointer and then set the value. The following two functions follow the same process:

```go
func changeInt(i *int) {   
  *i = 20 
} 

func changeIntReflect(i *int) {  
  iv := reflect.ValueOf(i)    
  iv.Elem().SetInt(20) 
}
```

If you don’t pass a pointer to a variable to reflect.ValueOf, you can still read the value of the variable using reflection. But if you try to use any of the methods that can change the value of a variable, the method calls will (not surprisingly) panic. The CanSet method on reflect.Value will tell you if calling Set will produce a panic.

#### Make New Values

