##### Views

You can create a **view** over the query, which gives a name to the query that you can refer to like an ordinary table:

```postgresql
CREATE VIEW myview AS     
	SELECT name, temp_lo, temp_hi, prcp, date, location     
  FROM weather, cities        
  WHERE city = name; 
  
SELECT * FROM myview;
```

Making liberal use of views is a key aspect of good SQL database design. Views allow you to encapsulate the details of the structure of your tables, which might change as your application evolves, behind consistent interfaces. Views can be used in almost any place a real table can be used. Building views upon other views is not uncommon.

##### Foreign Keys

Consider the following problem: You want to make sure that no one can insert rows in the weather table that do not have a matching entry in the cities table. This is called maintaining the **referential integrity** of your data.

```postgresql
CREATE TABLE cities (     
  name     varchar(80) primary key,     
  location point 
);

CREATE TABLE weather (   
  city      varchar(80) references cities(name),  
  temp_lo   int, 
  temp_hi   int,     
  prcp      real,    
  date      date 
);
```

##### Transactions

In PostgreSQL, a transaction is set up by surrounding the SQL commands of the transaction with `BEGIN` and `COMMIT` commands. So our banking transaction would actually look like:

```postgresql
BEGIN; 
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100.00   
WHERE name = 'Alice'; 
-- etc etc 
COMMIT;
```

If, partway through the transaction, we decide we do not want to commit (perhaps we just noticed that Alice's balance went negative), we can issue the command `ROLLBACK` instead of `COMMIT`, and all our updates so far will be canceled.

PostgreSQL actually treats every SQL statement as being executed within a transaction. If you do not issue a `BEGIN` command, then each individual statement has an implicit `BEGIN` and (if successful) `COMMIT` wrapped around it. A group of statements surrounded by `BEGIN` and `COMMIT` is sometimes called a **transaction block**.

It's possible to control the statements in a transaction in a more granular fashion through the use of **savepoints**. Savepoints allow you to selectively discard parts of the transaction, while committing the rest. After defining a savepoint with `SAVEPOINT`, you can if needed roll back to the savepoint with `ROLLBACK TO`. All the transaction's database changes between defining the savepoint and rolling back to it are discarded, but changes earlier than the savepoint are kept.

After rolling back to a savepoint, it continues to be defined, so you can roll back to it several times. Conversely, if you are sure you won't need to roll back to a particular savepoint again, it can be released, so the system can free some resources. Keep in mind that either releasing or rolling back to a savepoint will automatically release all savepoints that were defined after it.

Suppose we debit $100.00 from Alice's account, and credit Bob's account, only to find later that we should have credited Wally's account. We could do it using savepoints like this:

```postgresql
BEGIN; 
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100.00  
WHERE name = 'Alice'; 
SAVEPOINT my_savepoint; 
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100.00  
WHERE name = 'Bob'; 
-- oops ... forget that and use Wally's account 
ROLLBACK TO my_savepoint;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100.00    
WHERE name = 'Wally'; 
COMMIT;
```

##### Window Functions

A **window function** performs a calculation across a set of table rows that are somehow related to the current row. This is comparable to the type of calculation that can be done with an aggregate function. However, window functions do not cause rows to become grouped into a single output row like nonwindow aggregate calls would. Instead, the rows retain their separate identities. Behind the scenes, the window function is able to access more than just the current row of the query result.

Here is an example that shows how to compare each employee's salary with the average salary in his or her department:

```postgresql
SELECT depname, empno, salary, avg(salary) OVER (PARTITION BY  depname) 
FROM empsalary;
```

```
depname  | empno | salary |          avg 
-----------+-------+--------+---------------------- 
develop   |    11 |   5200 | 5020.0000000000000000  
develop   |     7 |   4200 | 5020.0000000000000000  
develop   |     9 |   4500 | 5020.0000000000000000  
develop   |     8 |   6000 | 5020.0000000000000000  
develop   |    10 |   5200 | 5020.0000000000000000  
personnel |     5 |   3500 | 3700.0000000000000000  
personnel |     2 |   3900 | 3700.0000000000000000  
sales     |     3 |   4800 | 4866.6666666666666667  
sales     |     1 |   5000 | 4866.6666666666666667  
sales     |     4 |   4800 | 4866.6666666666666667 
(10 rows)
```

The fourth column represents an average taken across all the table rows that have the same `depname` value as the current row. (This actually is the same function as the non-window `avg` aggregate, but the `OVER` clause causes it to be treated as a **window function** and computed across the **window frame**.) 

A window function call always contains an `OVER` clause directly following the **window function's name and argument(s)**. This is what syntactically distinguishes it from a normal function or nonwindow aggregate. The `OVER` clause determines exactly how the rows of the query are split up for processing by the window function. The `PARTITION BY` clause within `OVER` divides the rows into groups, or partitions, that share the same values of the `PARTITION BY` expression(s). For each row, the window function is computed across the rows that fall into the same partition as the current row.

You can also control the order in which rows are processed by window functions using `ORDER BY` within `OVER`. (The window `ORDER BY` does not even have to match the order in which the rows are output.) Here is an example:

```postgresql
SELECT depname, empno, salary,   
rank() OVER (PARTITION BY depname ORDER BY salary DESC) 
FROM empsalary;
```

```
depname  | empno | salary | rank 
-----------+-------+--------+----- 
develop   |     8 |   6000 |    1 
develop   |    10 |   5200 |    2 
develop   |    11 |   5200 |    2
develop   |     9 |   4500 |    4 
develop   |     7 |   4200 |    5  
personnel |     2 |   3900 |    1  
personnel |     5 |   3500 |    2  
sales     |     1 |   5000 |    1  
sales     |     4 |   4800 |    2  
sales     |     3 |   4800 |    2 
(10 rows)
```

As shown here, the rank function produces a numerical rank for each distinct `ORDER BY` value in the current row's partition, using the order defined by the `ORDER BY` clause. rank needs no explicit parameter, because its behavior is entirely determined by the `OVER` clause.

There is another important concept associated with window functions: for each row, there is a set of rows within its partition called its **window frame**. Some window functions act only on the rows of the window frame, rather than of the whole partition. By default, if `ORDER BY` is supplied then the frame consists of all rows from the start of the partition up through the current row, plus any following rows that are equal to the current row according to the `ORDER BY` clause. When `ORDER BY` is omitted the default frame consists of all rows in the partition. Here is an example using sum:

```postgresql
SELECT salary, sum(salary) OVER () 
FROM empsalary;
```

```
salary |  sum 
--------+------  
5200 | 47100   
5000 | 47100   
3500 | 47100   
4800 | 47100   
3900 | 47100   
4200 | 47100   
4500 | 47100  
4800 | 47100   
6000 | 47100  
5200 | 47100 

(10 rows)
```

Above, since there is no `ORDER BY` in the `OVER` clause, the window frame is the same as the **partition**, which for lack of `PARTITION BY` is the whole table; in other words each sum is taken over the whole table and so we get the same result for each output row. But if we add an `ORDER BY` clause, we get very different results:

```postgresql
SELECT salary, sum(salary) OVER (ORDER BY salary) 
FROM empsalary;
```

```
salary |  sum 
--------+------   
3500 |  3500   
3900 |  7400  
4200 | 11600   
4500 | 16100  
4800 | 25700   
4800 | 25700   
5000 | 30700   
5200 | 41100   
5200 | 41100   
6000 | 47100 

(10 rows)
```

Here the sum is taken from the first (lowest) salary up through the current one, including any duplicates of the current one (notice the results for the duplicated salaries).

Window functions are permitted only in the `SELECT` list and the `ORDER BY` clause of the query. They are forbidden elsewhere, such as in GROUP BY, HAVING and WHERE clauses. This is because they logically execute after the processing of those clauses. Also, window functions execute after non-window aggregate functions. This means it is valid to include an aggregate function call in the arguments of a window function, but not vice versa.

When a query involves multiple window functions, it is possible to write out each one with a separate `OVER` clause, but this is duplicative and error-prone if the same windowing behavior is wanted for several functions. Instead, each windowing behavior can be named in a `WINDOW` clause and then referenced in `OVER`. For example:

```postgresql
SELECT sum(salary) OVER w, avg(salary) OVER w  
FROM empsalary 
WINDOW w AS (PARTITION BY depname ORDER BY salary DESC);
```

##### Inheritance

```postgresql
CREATE TABLE cities ( 
  name       text, 
  population real,  
  elevation  int     -- (in ft) 
); 

CREATE TABLE capitals ( 
  state      char(2) UNIQUE NOT NULL 
) INHERITS (cities);
```

In this case, a row of `capitals` **inherits** all columns (name, population, and elevation) from its parent, `cities`. The type of the column name is text, a native PostgreSQL type for variable length character strings. The capitals table has an additional column, state, which shows its state abbreviation. In PostgreSQL, a table can inherit from zero or more other tables.

For example, the following query finds the names of all cities, including state capitals, that are located at an elevation over 500 feet:

```postgresql
SELECT name, elevation   
FROM cities   
WHERE elevation > 500;
```

```
name    | elevation 
-----------+---------- 
Las Vegas |      2174 
Mariposa  |      1953 
Madison   |       845 

(3 rows)
```

On the other hand, the following query finds all the cities that are not state capitals and are situated at an elevation over 500 feet:

```postgresql
SELECT name, elevation    
FROM ONLY cities   
WHERE elevation > 500;
```

```
name    | elevation 
-----------+---------- 
Las Vegas |      2174  
Mariposa  |      1953 

(2 rows)
```

Here the `ONLY` before cities indicates that the query should be run over only the cities table, and not tables below cities in the inheritance hierarchy. Many of the commands that we have already discussed — `SELECT`, `UPDATE`, and `DELETE` — support this `ONLY` notation.

Although **inheritance** is frequently useful, it has not been integrated with **unique constraints** or **foreign keys**, which limits its usefulness.







