##### Identifiers and Key Words

SQL input consists of a sequence of **commands**. A command is composed of a sequence of **tokens**, terminated by a semicolon (“`;`”). The end of the input stream also terminates a command. Which tokens are valid depends on the syntax of the particular command.

A token can be a **keyword**, an **identifier**, a **quoted identifier**, a **literal** (or constant), or a special character symbol. Tokens are normally separated by whitespace (space, tab, newline), but need not be if there is no ambiguity.

The system uses no more than **NAMEDATALEN-1** bytes of an identifier; longer names can be written in commands, but they will be truncated. By default, `NAMEDATALEN` is 64 so the maximum identifier length is 63 bytes.

Keywords and unquoted identifiers are case-insensitive. There is a second kind of identifier: the **delimited identifier** or **quoted identifier**. It is formed by enclosing an arbitrary sequence of characters in double quotes (`"`). A delimited identifier is always an identifier, never a keyword. So `"select"` could be used to refer to a column or table named “select”.

Quoting an identifier also makes it case-sensitive, whereas unquoted names are always folded to lower case. For example, the identifiers FOO, foo, and "foo" are considered the same by PostgreSQL, but "Foo" and "FOO" are different.

A variant of quoted identifiers allows including escaped Unicode characters identified by their code points. This variant starts with `U&` (upper or lower case U followed by ampersand) immediately before the opening double quote, without any spaces in between, for example `U&"foo"`. Inside the quotes, Unicode characters can be specified in escaped form by writing a backslash followed by the four-digit hexadecimal code point number or alternatively a backslash followed by a plus sign followed by a six-digit hexadecimal code point number. For example, the identifier `"data"` could be written as: `U&"d\0061t\+000061"`

If a different escape character than backslash is desired, it can be specified using the `UESCAPE` clause after the string, for example: `U&"d!0061t!+000061" UESCAPE '!'`

##### Constants

There are three kinds of **implicitly-typed constants** in PostgreSQL: strings, bit strings, and numbers. 

A **string constant** in SQL is an arbitrary sequence of characters bounded by single quotes (`'`), for example 'This is a string'. To include a single-quote character within a string constant, write two adjacent single quotes, e.g., `'Dianne''s horse'`. Note that this is not the same as a double-quote character (`"`).

Two string constants that are only separated by whitespace **with at least one newline** are concatenated and effectively treated as if the string had been written as one constant. For example:

```sql
SELECT 'foo'      
'bar';
```

is equivalent to: 

```sql
SELECT 'foobar'; 
```

but: 

```sql
SELECT 'foo'      'bar'; 
```

is not valid syntax. (This slightly bizarre behavior is specified by SQL; PostgreSQL is following the standard.)

PostgreSQL also accepts “escape” string constants, which are an extension to the SQL standard. An escape string constant is specified by writing the letter `E` (upper or lower case) just before the opening single quote, e.g., `E'foo'`. Within an escape string, using a backslash character (`\`) forms a C-like **backslash escape sequence**, for example: `E'foo\tbar'` becomes `foo	bar`.

While the standard syntax for specifying string constants is usually convenient, it can be difficult to understand when the desired string contains many single quotes, since each of those must be doubled. To allow more readable queries in such situations, PostgreSQL provides another way, called “dollar quoting”, to write string constants. A dollar-quoted string constant consists of a dollar sign ($), an optional “tag” of zero or more characters, another dollar sign, an arbitrary sequence of characters that makes up the string content, a dollar sign, the same tag that began this dollar quote, and a dollar sign. For example, here are two different ways to specify the string “Dianne's horse” using dollar quoting:

```postgresql
$$Dianne's horse$$ 
$SomeTag$Dianne's horse$SomeTag$
```

Bit-string constants look like regular string constants with a `B` (upper or lower case) immediately before the opening quote (no intervening whitespace), e.g., `B'1001'`. The only characters allowed within bit-string constants are 0 and 1. Alternatively, bit-string constants can be specified in hexadecimal notation, using a leading `X` (upper or lower case), e.g., `X'1FF'`.

These are some examples of valid numeric constants: `42` `3.5` `4.` `.001` `5e2` `1.925e-3`

These are some examples of valid non-decimal integer constants: `0b100101` `0B10011001` `0o273` `0O755` `0x42f` `0XFFFF`

For visual grouping, underscores can be inserted between digits. These have no further effect on the value of the constant. For example: `1_500_000_000` `0b10001000_00000000` `0o_1_755` `0xFFFF_FFFF` `1.618_034`

Underscores are not allowed at the start or end of a numeric constant or a group of digits (that is, immediately before or after the decimal point or the exponent marker), and more than one underscore in a row is not allowed.

A constant of an **arbitrary** type can be entered using any one of the following notations:

```
type 'string' 
'string'::type 
CAST ( 'string' AS type )
```

It is also possible to specify a type coercion using a function-like syntax:

```
typename ( 'string' )
```

but not all type names can be used in this way.

The `::`, `CAST()`, and function-call syntaxes can also be used to specify run-time type conversions of arbitrary expressions. To avoid syntactic ambiguity, the `type 'string'` syntax can only be used to specify the type of a simple literal constant. Another restriction on the `type 'string'` syntax is that it does not work for array types; use `::` or `CAST()` to specify the type of an array constant.

The `CAST()` syntax conforms to SQL. The `type 'string'` syntax is a generalization of the standard: SQL specifies this syntax only for a few data types, but PostgreSQL allows it for all types. The syntax with `::` is historical PostgreSQL usage, as is the function-call syntax.

##### Value Expressions





