## Data Manipulation

### Inserting Data

```sql
CREATE TABLE products (  
  product_no integer,  
  name text,    
  price numeric
);
```

```sql
INSERT INTO products VALUES (1, 'Cheese', 9.99);
```

Both of the following commands have the same effect as the one above:

```sql
INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES (1, 'Cheese',  9.99); 
INSERT INTO products (name, price, product_no) VALUES ('Cheese',  9.99, 1);
```

If you don't have values for all the columns, you can omit some of them. In that case, the columns will be filled with their default values.

```sql
INSERT INTO products (product_no, name) VALUES (1, 'Cheese'); 
INSERT INTO products VALUES (1, 'Cheese');
```

The second form is a PostgreSQL extension. It fills the columns from the left with as many values as are given, and the rest will be defaulted.

For clarity, you can also request default values explicitly, for individual columns or for the entire row:

```sql
INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES (1, 'Cheese',  DEFAULT);
INSERT INTO products DEFAULT VALUES;
```

You can insert multiple rows in a single command:

```sql
INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price) VALUES   
	(1, 'Cheese', 9.99),  
	(2, 'Bread', 1.99),    
	(3, 'Milk', 2.99);
```

It is also possible to insert the result of a query (which might be no rows, one row, or many rows):

```sql
INSERT INTO products (product_no, name, price)   
	SELECT product_no, name, price FROM new_products     
		WHERE release_date = 'today';
```

When inserting a lot of data at the same time, consider using the `COPY` command. It is not as flexible as the `INSERT` command, but is more efficient.

### Updating Data

To update existing rows, use the UPDATE command. This requires three pieces of information: 

1. The name of the table and column to update 
2. The new value of the column 
3. Which row(s) to update

```sql
UPDATE products SET price = 10 WHERE price = 5;
```

The new column value can be any scalar expression, not just a constant.

```sql
UPDATE products SET price = price * 1.10;
```

Note that the equals sign in the `SET` clause is an assignment while the one in the `WHERE` clause is a comparison.

You can update more than one column in an `UPDATE` command by listing more than one assignment in the `SET` clause. For example:

```sql
UPDATE mytable SET a = 5, b = 3, c = 1 WHERE a > 0;
```

### Deleting Data

```sql
DELETE FROM products WHERE price = 10;
```

If you simply write:

```sql
DELETE FROM products;
```

then all rows in the table will be deleted!

### Returning Data from Modified Rows

Sometimes it is useful to obtain data from modified rows while they are being manipulated. The `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`, and `MERGE` commands all have an optional `RETURNING` clause that supports this. Use of `RETURNING` avoids performing an extra database query to collect the data.

The allowed contents of a `RETURNING` clause are the same as a `SELECT` command's output list. It can contain column names of the command's target table, or value expressions using those columns. A common shorthand is `RETURNING *`, which selects all columns of the target table in order.

In an `INSERT`, the data available to `RETURNING` is the row as it was inserted. This is not so useful in trivial inserts, since it would just repeat the data provided by the client. But it can be very handy when relying on computed default values. For example, when using a `serial` column to provide unique identifiers, `RETURNING` can return the ID assigned to a new row:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (firstname text, lastname text, id serial  primary key);

INSERT INTO users (firstname, lastname) VALUES ('Joe', 'Cool')  RETURNING id;
```

In an `UPDATE`, the data available to `RETURNING` is the new content of the modified row. For example:

```sql
UPDATE products SET price = price * 1.10   
	WHERE price <= 99.99   
	RETURNING name, price AS new_price;
```

In a `DELETE`, the data available to `RETURNING` is the content of the deleted row. For example:

```sql
DELETE FROM products   
	WHERE obsoletion_date = 'today'   
	RETURNING *;
```

In a `MERGE`, the data available to `RETURNING` is the content of the source row plus the content of the inserted, updated, or deleted target row. Since it is quite common for the source and target to have many of the same columns, specifying `RETURNING *` can lead to a lot of duplicated columns, so it is often more useful to qualify it so as to return just the source or target row. For example:

```sql
MERGE INTO products p USING new_products n ON p.product_no = n.product_no   
	WHEN NOT MATCHED THEN INSERT VALUES (n.product_no, n.name, n.price)   
	WHEN MATCHED THEN UPDATE SET name = n.name, price = n.price   
	RETURNING p.*;
```

