## Queries

The process of retrieving or the command to retrieve data from a database is called a query. The general syntax of the SELECT command is:

```sql
[WITH with_queries] SELECT select_list 
FROM table_expression  
[sort_specification]
```

In general, table expressions can be complex constructs of base tables, joins, and subqueries. But you can also omit the table expression entirely and use the `SELECT` command as a calculator:

```sql
SELECT 3 * 4;
```

This is more useful if the expressions in the select list return varying results. For example, you could call a function this way:

```sql
SELECT random();
```

### Table Expressions

A table expression computes a table. The table expression contains a `FROM` clause that is optionally followed by `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`, and `HAVING` clauses.

#### The `FROM` Clause

The `FROM` clause derives a table from one or more other tables given in a comma-separated table reference list.

```sql
FROM table_reference [, table_reference [, ...]]
```

If more than one table reference is listed in the `FROM` clause, the tables are cross-joined (that is, the Cartesian product of their rows is formed).

##### Joined Tables

The general syntax of a joined table is:

```sql
T1 join_type T2 [ join_condition ]
```

**Join Types**

Cross join:

`T1 CROSS JOIN T2`

For every possible combination of rows from `T1` and `T2` (i.e., a Cartesian product), the joined table will contain a row consisting of all columns in `T1` followed by all columns in `T2`. If the tables have N and M rows respectively, the joined table will have N * M rows.

`FROM T1 CROSS JOIN T2` is equivalent to `FROM T1 INNER JOIN T2 ON TRUE`. It is also equivalent to `FROM T1, T2`.

**Note**: This latter equivalence does not hold exactly when more than two tables appear, because JOIN binds more tightly than comma. For example `FROM T1 CROSS JOIN T2 INNER JOIN T3 ON condition` is not the same as `FROM T1, T2 INNER JOIN T3 ON condition` because the condition can reference `T1` in the first case but not the second.

Qualified joins:

```sql
T1 { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2 ON boolean_expression 
T1 { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2 USING ( join column list ) 
T1 NATURAL { [INNER] | { LEFT | RIGHT | FULL } [OUTER] } JOIN T2
```

The words `INNER` and `OUTER` are optional in all forms. `INNER` is the default; `LEFT`, `RIGHT`, and `FULL` imply an outer join.

The join condition is specified in the `ON` or `USING` clause, or implicitly by the word `NATURAL`. The join condition determines which rows from the two source tables are considered to “match”.

The possible types of qualified join are:

`INNER JOIN`

- For each row R1 of T1, the joined table has a row for each row in T2 that satisfies the join condition with R1.

`LEFT OUTER JOIN`

- First, an inner join is performed. Then, for each row in T1 that does not satisfy the join condition with any row in T2, a joined row is added with null values in columns of T2. Thus, the joined table always has at least one row for each row in T1.

`RIGHT OUTER JOIN`

- First, an inner join is performed. Then, for each row in T2 that does not satisfy the join condition with any row in T1, a joined row is added with null values in columns of T1. This is the converse of a left join: the result table will always have a row for each row in T2.

`FULL OUTER JOIN`

- First, an inner join is performed. Then, for each row in T1 that does not satisfy the join condition with any row in T2, a joined row is added with null values in columns of T2. Also, for each row of T2 that does not satisfy the join condition with any row in T1, a joined row with null values in the columns of T1 is added.

The `ON` clause is the most general kind of join condition: it takes a Boolean value expression of the same kind as is used in a `WHERE` clause. A pair of rows from T1 and T2 match if the `ON` expression evaluates to true.

The `USING` clause is a shorthand that allows you to take advantage of the specific situation where both sides of the join use the same name for the joining column(s). It takes a comma-separated list of the shared column names and forms a join condition that includes an equality comparison for each one. For example, joining T1 and T2 with `USING (a, b)` produces the join condition `ON T1.a = T2.a AND T1.b = T2.b`.

Furthermore, the output of `JOIN USING` suppresses redundant columns: there is no need to print both of the matched columns, since they must have equal values.

Finally, `NATURAL` is a shorthand form of USING: it forms a USING list consisting of all column names that appear in both input tables. As with USING, these columns appear only once in the output table. If there are no common column names, `NATURAL JOIN` behaves like `CROSS JOIN`.

To put this together, assume we have tables `t1`:

```
num | name 
----+-----  
	1 | a  
	2 | b  
	3 | c
```

and `t2`:

```
num | value 
----+------  
	1 | xxx  
	3 | yyy 
	5 | zzz
```

then we get the following results for the various joins:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 CROSS JOIN t2;  

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------ 
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx   
  1 | a    |   3 | yyy  
  1 | a    |   5 | zzz  
  2 | b    |   1 | xxx  
  2 | b    |   3 | yyy  
  2 | b    |   5 | zzz  
  3 | c    |   1 | xxx  
  3 | c    |   3 | yyy   
  3 | c    |   5 | zzz 
(9 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num;

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------  
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx  
  3 | c    |   3 | yyy 
(2 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 USING (num);

/*
num | name | value 
----+------+------ 
  1 | a    | xxx 
  3 | c    | yyy 
(2 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 NATURAL INNER JOIN t2;

/*
num | name | value 
----+------+------  
  1 | a    | xxx   
  3 | c    | yyy 
(2 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 LEFT JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num;

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------ 
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx   
  2 | b    |     |   
  3 | c    |   3 | yyy 
(3 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 LEFT JOIN t2 USING (num);

/*
num | name | value 
----+------+------ 
  1 | a    | xxx   
  2 | b    |    
  3 | c    | yyy 
(3 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 RIGHT JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num;

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------ 
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx  
  3 | c    |   3 | yyy   
  	|      |   5 | zzz 
(3 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 FULL JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num;

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------  
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx    
  2 | b    |     |    
  3 | c    |   3 | yyy     
 		|      |   5 | zzz 
(4 rows)
*/
```

The join condition specified with `ON` can also contain conditions that do not relate directly to the join. This can prove useful for some queries but needs to be thought out carefully. For example:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 LEFT JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num AND t2.value = 'xxx';

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------  
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx  
  2 | b    |     |   
  3 | c    |     | 
(3 rows)
*/
```

Notice that placing the restriction in the `WHERE` clause produces a different result:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 LEFT JOIN t2 ON t1.num = t2.num WHERE t2.value = 'xxx';

/*
num | name | num | value 
----+------+-----+------  
  1 | a    |   1 | xxx 
(1 row)
*/
```

This is because a restriction placed in the `ON` clause is processed before the join, while a restriction placed in the `WHERE` clause is processed after the join. That does not matter with inner joins, but it matters a lot with outer joins.

##### Table and Column Aliases

To create a table alias, write

```sql
FROM table_reference AS alias
```

or

```sql
FROM table_reference alias
```

A typical application of table aliases is to assign short identifiers to long table names to keep the join clauses readable. For example:

```sql
SELECT * 
FROM some_very_long_table_name s 
JOIN another_fairly_long_name a ON s.id = a.num;
```

The alias becomes the new name of the table reference so far as the current query is concerned — it is not allowed to refer to the table by the original name elsewhere in the query. Thus, this is not valid:

```sql
SELECT * FROM my_table AS m WHERE my_table.a > 5;    -- wrong
```

Table aliases are mainly for notational convenience, but it is necessary to use them when joining a table to itself, e.g.:

```sql
SELECT * FROM people AS mother JOIN people AS child ON mother.id = child.mother_id;
```

Parentheses are used to resolve ambiguities. In the following example, the first statement assigns the alias b to the second instance of `my_table`, but the second statement assigns the alias to the result of the join:

```sql
SELECT * FROM my_table AS a CROSS JOIN my_table AS b ...
SELECT * FROM (my_table AS a CROSS JOIN my_table) AS b ...
```

##### Subqueries

Subqueries specifying a derived table must be enclosed in parentheses. They may be assigned a table alias name.

```sql
FROM (SELECT * FROM table1) AS alias_name
```

This example is equivalent to `FROM table1 AS alias_name`.

A subquery can also be a `VALUES` list:

```sql
FROM (VALUES ('anne', 'smith'), ('bob', 'jones'), ('joe', 'blow')) 
	AS names(first, last)
```

Again, a table alias is optional. Assigning alias names to the columns of the `VALUES` list is optional, but is good practice.

According to the SQL standard, a table alias name must be supplied for a subquery. PostgreSQL allows `AS` and the alias to be omitted.

##### `LATERAL` Subqueries

Subqueries appearing in `FROM` can be preceded by the key word `LATERAL`. This allows them to reference columns provided by preceding `FROM` items. (Without `LATERAL`, each subquery is evaluated independently and so cannot cross-reference any other `FROM` item.)

```sql
SELECT * FROM foo, LATERAL (SELECT * FROM bar WHERE bar.id = foo.bar_id) ss;
```

This is not especially useful since it has exactly the same result as the more conventional:

```
SELECT * FROM foo, bar WHERE bar.id = foo.bar_id;
```

#### The `WHERE` Clause

The join condition of an inner join can be written either in the `WHERE` clause or in the `JOIN` clause. For example, these table expressions are equivalent:

```sql
FROM a, b WHERE a.id = b.id AND b.val > 5
```

and:

```sql
FROM a INNER JOIN b ON (a.id = b.id) WHERE b.val > 5
```

or perhaps even:

```sql
FROM a NATURAL JOIN b WHERE b.val > 5
```

Which one of these you use is mainly a matter of style. The `JOIN` syntax in the `FROM` clause is probably not as portable to other SQL database management systems, even though it is in the SQL standard. For outer joins there is no choice: they must be done in the `FROM` clause. The `ON` or `USING` clause of an outer join is not equivalent to a `WHERE` condition, because it results in the addition of rows (for unmatched input rows) as well as the removal of rows in the final result.

#### The `GROUP BY` and `HAVING` Clauses

The `GROUP BY` clause is used to group together those rows in a table that have the same values in all the columns listed. The order in which the columns are listed does not matter. The effect is to combine each set of rows having common values into one group row that represents all rows in the group. This is done to eliminate redundancy in the output and/or compute aggregates that apply to these groups. For instance:

```sql
SELECT * FROM test1;  

/*
x | y 
--+-- 
a | 3 
c | 2 
b | 5 
a | 1 
(4 rows)
*/
```

```sql
SELECT x FROM test1 GROUP BY x;  


x 
-
a  
b 
c 
(3 rows)

```

In the second query, we could not have written `SELECT * FROM test1 GROUP BY x`, because there is no single value for the column y that could be associated with each group. The grouped-by columns can be referenced in the select list since they have a single value in each group. 

In general, if a table is grouped, columns that are not listed in `GROUP BY` cannot be referenced except in aggregate expressions. An example with aggregate expressions is:

```sql
SELECT x, sum(y) FROM test1 GROUP BY x;  

x | sum 
--+---- 
a |   4 
b |   5 
c |   2
(3 rows)
```

Here `sum` is an aggregate function that computes a single value over the entire group.

Grouping without aggregate expressions effectively calculates the set of distinct values in a column. This can also be achieved using the `DISTINCT` clause.

Here is another example: it calculates the total sales for each product (rather than the total sales of all products):

```sql
SELECT product_id, p.name, (sum(s.units) * p.price) AS sales  
FROM products p LEFT JOIN sales s USING (product_id) 
GROUP BY product_id, p.name, p.price;
```

In this example, the columns product_id, p.name, and p.price must be in the GROUP BY clause since they are referenced in the query select list (but see below). The column s.units does not have to be in the GROUP BY list since it is only used in an aggregate expression (sum(...)), which represents the sales of a product. For each product, the query returns a summary row about all sales of the product. 

If the products table is set up so that, say, product_id is the primary key, then it would be enough to group by product_id in the above example, since name and price would be functionally dependent on the product ID, and so there would be no ambiguity about which name and price value to return for each product ID group.

If a table has been grouped using GROUP BY, but only certain groups are of interest, the HAVING clause can be used, much like a WHERE clause, to eliminate groups from the result.

Expressions in the HAVING clause can refer both to grouped expressions and to ungrouped expressions (which necessarily involve an aggregate function).

```sql
SELECT x, sum(y) FROM test1 GROUP BY x HAVING sum(y) > 3;  

x | sum 
--+---- 
a |   4  
b |   5 
(2 rows) 


SELECT x, sum(y) FROM test1 GROUP BY x HAVING x < 'c'; 
x | sum 
--+---- 
a |   4 
b |   5 
(2 rows)
```

Again, a more realistic example:

```sql
SELECT product_id, p.name, (sum(s.units) * (p.price - p.cost)) AS profit  
FROM products p 
LEFT JOIN sales s USING (product_id)   
WHERE s.date > CURRENT_DATE - INTERVAL '4 weeks'   
GROUP BY product_id, p.name, p.price, p.cost  
HAVING sum(p.price * s.units) > 5000;
```

In the example above, the WHERE clause is selecting rows by a column that is not grouped (the expression is only true for sales during the last four weeks), while the HAVING clause restricts the output to groups with total gross sales over 5000.

#### GROUPING SETS, CUBE, and ROLLUP

```sql
SELECT * FROM items_sold;  

brand | size | sales 
-------+------+------ 
Foo   | L    |  10  
Foo   | M    |  20  
Bar   | M    |  15  
Bar   | L    |  5 
(4 rows) 


SELECT brand, size, sum(sales) FROM items_sold 
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS ((brand), (size), ());  

brand | size | sum 
------+------+---- 
Foo   |      |  30  
Bar   |      |  20     
      | L    |  15  
      | M    |  35     
      |      |  50 
(5 rows)
```

An empty grouping set means that all rows are aggregated down to a single group.

A shorthand notation is provided for specifying two common types of grouping set. A clause of the form

```sql
ROLLUP ( e1, e2, e3, ... )
```

it is equivalent to

```sql
GROUPING SETS (   
  ( e1, e2, e3, ... ),  
  ...
  ( e1, e2 ),  
  ( e1 ),   
  ( ) 
)
```

```sql
CUBE ( a, b, c )
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUPING SETS (  
  ( a, b, c ),  
  ( a, b    ), 
  ( a,    c ),  
  ( a       ),   
  (    b, c ),   
  (    b    ),  
  (       c ),   
  (         )
)
```

```sql
CUBE ( (a, b), (c, d) )
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUPING SETS (   
  ( a, b, c, d ),  
  ( a, b       ),  
  (       c, d ),  
  (            ) 
)
```

```sql
ROLLUP ( a, (b, c), d )
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUPING SETS (   
  ( a, b, c, d ),  
  ( a, b, c    ),  
  ( a          ),  
  (            ) 
)
```

If multiple grouping items are specified in a single GROUP BY clause, then the final list of grouping sets is the Cartesian product of the individual items. For example:

```sql
GROUP BY a, CUBE (b, c), GROUPING SETS ((d), (e))
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (   
  (a, b, c, d), (a, b, c, e),    
  (a, b, d),    (a, b, e),    
  (a, c, d),    (a, c, e),  
  (a, d),       (a, e) 
)
```

When specifying multiple grouping items together, the final set of grouping sets might contain duplicates. For example:

```sql
GROUP BY ROLLUP (a, b), ROLLUP (a, c)
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (  
  (a, b, c),  
  (a, b),    
  (a, b),  
  (a, c),  
  (a),   
  (a),  
  (a, c), 
  (a),   
  () 
)
```

If these duplicates are undesirable, they can be removed using the DISTINCT clause directly on the GROUP BY. Therefore:

```sql
GROUP BY DISTINCT ROLLUP (a, b), ROLLUP (a, c)
```

is equivalent to

```sql
GROUP BY GROUPING SETS (   
  (a, b, c),  
  (a, b),  
  (a, c),  
  (a),   
  () 
)
```

### Select Lists

#### Column Labels

The AS key word is usually optional, but in some cases where the desired column name matches a PostgreSQL key word, you must write AS or double-quote the column name in order to avoid ambiguity. For example, FROM is one such key word, so this does not work:

```sql
SELECT a from, b + c AS sum FROM ...
```

but either of these do:

```sql
SELECT a AS from, b + c AS sum FROM ...
SELECT a "from", b + c AS sum FROM ...
```

For greatest safety against possible future key word additions, it is recommended that you always either write AS or double-quote the output column name.

### Combining Queries (UNION, INTERSECT, EXCEPT)

```sql
query1 UNION [ALL] query2 
query1 INTERSECT [ALL] query2 
query1 EXCEPT [ALL] query2
```

UNION effectively appends the result of query2 to the result of query1 (although there is no guarantee that this is the order in which the rows are actually returned). Furthermore, it eliminates duplicate rows from its result, in the same way as DISTINCT, unless UNION ALL is used. 

INTERSECT returns all rows that are both in the result of query1 and in the result of query2. Duplicate rows are eliminated unless INTERSECT ALL is used. 

EXCEPT returns all rows that are in the result of query1 but not in the result of query2. (This is sometimes called the difference between two queries.) Again, duplicates are eliminated unless EXCEPT ALL is used.

```sql
query1 UNION query2 EXCEPT query3
```

is equivalent to

```sql
(query1 UNION query2) EXCEPT query3
```

As shown here, you can use parentheses to control the order of evaluation. Without parentheses, UNION and EXCEPT associate left-to-right, but INTERSECT binds more tightly than those two operators. Thus

```sql
query1 UNION query2 INTERSECT query3
```

means

```sql
query1 UNION (query2 INTERSECT query3)
```

### `WITH` Queries (Common Table Expressions)



