## Data Types

### Numeric Types

#### Integer Types

The type integer is the common choice, as it offers the best balance between range, storage size, and performance. The smallint type is generally only used if disk space is at a premium. The bigint type is designed to be used when the range of the integer type is insufficient.

#### Arbitrary Precision Numbers

```
NUMERIC(precision, scale)
```

The precision of a numeric is the total count of significant digits in the whole number, that is, the number of digits to both sides of the decimal point. The scale of a numeric is the count of decimal digits in the fractional part, to the right of the decimal point. So the number 23.5141 has a precision of 6 and a scale of 4. Integers can be considered to have a scale of zero.

The maximum precision that can be explicitly specified in a numeric type declaration is 1000.

In most implementations of the “not-a-number” concept, NaN is not considered equal to any other numeric value (including NaN). In order to allow numeric values to be sorted and used in tree-based indexes, PostgreSQL treats NaN values as equal, and greater than all non-NaN values.

The types `decimal` and `numeric` are equivalent. Both types are part of the SQL standard. 

When rounding values, the `numeric` type rounds ties away from zero, while (on most machines) the `real` and `double precision` types round ties to the nearest **even number**. For example:

```sql
SELECT x,  
	round(x::numeric) AS num_round,  
  round(x::double precision) AS dbl_round 
FROM generate_series(-3.5, 3.5, 1) as x;

x    | num_round | dbl_round 
-----+-----------+---------- 
-3.5 |        -4 |        -4 
-2.5 |        -3 |        -2 
-1.5 |        -2 |        -2 
-0.5 |        -1 |        -0  
 0.5 |         1 |         0   
 1.5 |         2 |         2   
 2.5 |         3 |         2  
 3.5 |         4 |         4 
(8 rows)
```

#### Floating-Point Types

The data types `real` and `double precision` are inexact, variable-precision numeric types.

If you require exact storage and calculations (such as for monetary amounts), use the `numeric` type instead. 

If you want to do complicated calculations with these types for anything important, especially if you rely on certain behavior in boundary cases (infinity, underflow), you should evaluate the implementation carefully. 

Comparing two floating-point values for equality might not always work as expected.

On all currently supported platforms, the `real` type has a range of around 1E-37 to 1E+37 with a precision of at least 6 decimal digits. The `double precision` type has a range of around 1E-307 to 1E+308 with a precision of at least 15 digits.

#### Serial Types

The data types `smallserial`, `serial` and `bigserial` are not true types, but merely a notational convenience for creating unique identifier columns (similar to the `AUTO_INCREMENT` property supported by some other databases). In the current implementation, specifying:

```sql
CREATE TABLE tablename (  
  colname SERIAL 
);
```

is equivalent to specifying:

```sql
CREATE SEQUENCE tablename_colname_seq AS integer; 
CREATE TABLE tablename (   
  colname integer NOT NULL DEFAULT nextval('tablename_colname_seq') 
);
ALTER SEQUENCE tablename_colname_seq OWNED BY tablename.colname;
```

Thus, we have created an integer column and arranged for its default values to be assigned from a sequence generator. A `NOT NULL` constraint is applied to ensure that a null value cannot be inserted. (In most cases you would also want to attach a `UNIQUE` or `PRIMARY KEY` constraint to prevent duplicate values from being inserted by accident, but this is not automatic.) Lastly, the sequence is marked as “owned by” the column, so that it will be dropped if the column or table is dropped.

Because `smallserial`, `serial` and `bigserial` are implemented using sequences, there may be "holes" or gaps in the sequence of values which appears in the column, even if no rows are ever deleted. See `nextval()` in Section 9.17 for details.

The type names `serial` and `serial4` are equivalent: both create `integer` columns. The type names `bigserial` and `serial8` work the same way, except that they create a `bigint` column. `bigserial` should be used if you anticipate the use of more than $2^{31}$ identifiers over the lifetime of the table. The type names `smallserial` and `serial2` also work the same way, except that they create a `smallint` column.

### Monetary Types

Values of the `numeric`, `int`, and `bigint` data types can be cast to `money`. Conversion from the `real` and `double precision` data types can be done by casting to `numeric` first, for example:

```sql
SELECT '12.34'::float8::numeric::money;
```

However, this is not recommended. Floating point numbers should not be used to handle money due to the potential for rounding errors.

A `money` value can be cast to numeric without loss of precision. Conversion to other types could potentially lose precision, and must also be done in two stages:

```sql
SELECT '52093.89'::money::numeric::float8;
```

### Character Types

If specified, the length n must be greater than zero and cannot exceed 10,485,760. If `character varying` (or `varchar`) is used without length specifier, the type accepts strings of any length. If `bpchar` lacks a length specifier, it also accepts strings of any length, but trailing spaces are semantically insignificant. If `character` (or `char`) lacks a specifier, it is equivalent to `character(1)`.

Values of type `character` are physically padded with spaces to the specified width n, and are stored and displayed that way. However, trailing spaces are treated as semantically insignificant and disregarded when comparing two values of type `character`.

Trailing spaces are removed when converting a `character` value to one of the other string types. Note that trailing spaces are semantically significant in `character varying` and text values, and when using pattern matching, that is `LIKE` and regular expressions.

In PostgreSQL, `character(n)` is usually the slowest of the three because of its additional storage costs. In most situations `text` or `character varying` should be used instead.

```sql
CREATE TABLE test1 (a character(4)); 
INSERT INTO test1 VALUES ('ok'); 
SELECT a, char_length(a) FROM test1;

a    | char_length 
-----+------------ 
ok   |           2
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE test2 (b varchar(5)); 
INSERT INTO test2 VALUES ('ok'); 
INSERT INTO test2 VALUES ('good      '); 
INSERT INTO test2 VALUES ('too long'); 
ERROR:  value too long for type character varying(5) 
INSERT INTO test2 VALUES ('too long'::varchar(5)); -- explicit  truncation 
SELECT b, char_length(b) FROM test2;

b     | char_length 
------+------------ 
ok    |           2 
good  |           5  
too l |           5
```

### Binary Data Types