When the great innovation appears, it will almost certainly be in a muddled, incomplete and confusing form. To the discoverer himself it will be only half understood; to everybody else it will be a mystery. For any speculation which does not at first glance look crazy, there is no hope.  —Freeman Dyson

# Introduction

The internet is probably the most important invention of the twentieth century. It transformed the world much as earlier technological revolutions—the printing press, the steam engine, electricity—did before.

Unlike many other inventions, the internet wasn’t immediately **monetized**. Its early architects created the network not as a centralized organization but as an open platform that anyone—artists, users, developers, companies, and others—could access equally. At a relatively low cost and without needing approval, anyone anywhere could create and share code, art, writing, music, games, websites, startups, or whatever else could be dreamed up.

> [monetize](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/monetize?q=monetized): to make money from something

And whatever you created, you owned. As long as you obeyed the law, no one could change the rules on you, extract more money from you, or take away what you built. The internet was designed to be permissionless and democratically governed, as were its original networks, email and the web. No participants would be privileged over others. Anyone could build on top of these networks and control their creative and economic destinies.

This freedom and sense of ownership led to a golden period of creativity and innovation that drove the growth of the internet through the 1990s and 2000s, leading to countless applications that have transformed our world and the way we live, work, and play.

And then everything changed.

Starting in the mid-2000s, a small group of big companies wrenched control away. Today the top 1 percent of social networks account for 95 percent of social web traffic and 86 percent of social mobile app use. The top 1 percent of search engines account for 97 percent of search traffic, and the top 1 percent of e-commerce sites account for 57 percent of e-commerce traffic. Outside of China, Apple and Google account for more than 95 percent of the mobile app store market. In the past decade, the five biggest tech companies grew from about 25 percent to nearly 50 percent of the market capitalization of the Nasdaq-100. Startups and creative people increasingly depend on networks run by megacorporations like Alphabet (parent of Google and YouTube), Amazon, Apple, Meta (parent of Facebook and Instagram), and Twitter (rebranded as X) to find customers, build audiences, and connect with peers.

The internet got intermediated, in other words. The network went from permissionless to permissioned.

The good news is that billions of people got access to amazing technologies, many of which were free to use. The bad news is that for those same billions, a centralized internet run by a handful of mostly ad-based services meant fewer software choices, weakened data privacy, and diminished control over their online lives. And it became much harder for startups, creators, and other groups to grow their internet presences without worrying about centralized platforms changing the rules on them and taking away their audiences, profits, and power.

Even though Big Tech companies deliver significant value, their services come with considerable negative **externalities**. Widespread user surveillance is one issue. Meta, Google, and other ad-based companies run elaborate tracking systems that monitor every click, search, and social interaction. This has made the internet **adversarial**: an estimated 40 percent of internet users use ad blockers that protect against tracking. Apple has made privacy a **centerpiece** of its marketing—a thinly **veiled** dig at Meta and Google—while simultaneously expanding its own advertising network. In order to use online services, users need to agree to complicated privacy policies—which almost no one reads and even fewer can understand—that allow their personal data to be used in almost any way the services please.

> [externality](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/externality?q=externalities): a positive or negative effect for someone else as a result of something that you do
>
> [adversarial](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/adversarial): involving people opposing or disagreeing with each other
>
> [centerpiece](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/centrepiece): the most important or attractive part or feature of something
>
> [veiled](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/veiled): Veiled words or ways of behaving are not direct or expressed clearly.

Big Tech also controls what we see and watch. The most visible example of this is **deplatforming**: when services eject people, usually without transparent due process. Alternatively, people may get silenced and not even know it, a practice called **shadowbanning**. Search and social ranking algorithms can change lives, make or break businesses, and even influence elections, yet the code that powers them is controlled by **unaccountable** corporate management teams and hidden from public **scrutiny**.

> [deplatform](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/deplatform?q=deplatforming): to refuse someone an opportunity to make their ideas or beliefs known publicly, because you think these beliefs are dangerous or unacceptable
>
> [shadowbanning](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/shadowbanning): the act of a social media company limiting who can see someone's posts (= messages or pictures on social media), usually without the person who has published them knowing
>
> [unaccountable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/unaccountable): not able to be explained or understood
>
> [scrutiny](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/scrutiny): the careful and detailed examination of something in order to get information about it

A subtler and equally troubling point is how these power brokers architect their networks to restrict and constrain startups, impose high rents on creators, and **disenfranchise** users. The negative effects of these design choices are **threefold**: (1) they stifle innovation; (2) they tax creativity; and (3) they concentrate power and money in the hands of a few.

> [disenfranchise](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/disenfranchise): to take away power or opportunities, especially the right to vote, from a person or group
>
> [threefold](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/threefold): having three parts

This is especially dangerous when you consider that the killer app of the internet is networks. Most of what people do online involves networks: The web and email are networks. Social apps like Instagram, TikTok, and Twitter are networks. Payment apps like PayPal and Venmo are networks. Marketplaces like Airbnb and Uber are networks. Almost every useful online service is a network.

Networks—computing networks, of course, but also developer platforms, marketplaces, financial networks, social networks, and all variety of communities coming together online—have always been a powerful part of the promise of the internet. Developers, entrepreneurs, and everyday internet users have nurtured and nourished tens of thousands of networks, **unleashing** an **unprecedented** wave of creation and coordination. Yet the networks that have lasted are mostly owned and controlled by private companies.

> [unleash](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/unleash?q=unleashing): to suddenly release a violent force that cannot be controlled
>
> [unprecedented](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/unprecedented): never having happened or existed in the past

The problem stems from permission. Today creators and startups need to ask for permission from centralized gatekeepers and **incumbents** to launch and grow new products. In business, permission seeking is not like asking your parents or teachers for permission, where you get a simple yes or no answer. Nor is it like traffic lights setting the rules of the road. In business, permission becomes a **pretense** for **tyranny**. Dominant tech businesses leverage the power of permission to **thwart** competition, **desolate** markets, and extract rents.

> [incumbent](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/incumbent?q=incumbents): the person who has or had a particular official position
>
> [pretence](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/pretence): a way of behaving that is intended to deceive people
>
> [tyranny](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/tyranny): government by a ruler or small group of people who have unlimited power over the people in their country or state and use it unfairly and cruelly
>
> [thwart](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/thwart): to stop something from happening or someone from doing something
>
> desolate: make (a place) appear bleakly empty.

And those rents are **exorbitant**. The combined revenue of the five largest social networks—Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, TikTok, and Twitter—is about \$150 billion per year. Nearly all major social networks have “take rates”—the percentage of revenue network owners take from network users—of 100 percent, or near to it. (YouTube is the one outlier with a take rate of 45 percent, for reasons we’ll get into later.) This means the vast majority of that \$150 billion goes to those companies instead of the users, creators, and entrepreneurs who contribute, build on top, and create value for all.

> [exorbitant](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/exorbitant): Exorbitant prices, demands, etc. are much too large

Mobile phones—which dominate computing today, especially internationally—underscore the imbalance. People spend about seven hours per day on internet-connected devices. About half that time they spend using phones, where apps occupy 90 percent of their time. That means people spend about three hours per day in the **thrall** of an app store **duopoly**: Apple and Google. These companies charge up to 30 percent for payments. That’s more than ten times the payment industry norm. Such steep take rates are unheard of in other markets, and they reflect how powerful these companies have become.

> [in thrall](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/thrall): If you are in thrall to someone or something, or in the thrall of someone or something, he, she, or it has a lot of power to control you.
>
> [duopoly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/duopoly): a situation in which only two companies control all the business in a particular industry

This is what I mean when I say corporate networks tax creativity. The taxation is literal.

Big Tech companies also **wield** their power to **squelch** competitors, reducing options for consumers. Facebook and Twitter famously took antisocial turns in the early 2010s, cutting off third-party companies that were building apps for users on top of their platforms. These abrupt crackdowns punished many developers and, therefore, punished users by offering fewer products, fewer choices, and less freedom. Most other large social platforms have executed the same playbook. Today almost no new startup activity takes place on top of social networks. Developers know better than to lay foundations on quicksand.

> [wield](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/wield): to hold a weapon or tool and look as if you are going to use it
>
> [squelch](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/squelch): to quickly end something that is causing you problems

Pause for a moment: Social networks, whether in person or online, are the essence of human connection and coordination. They are one of the most widely used applications by people of all ages, and yet no new startups have survived, let alone thrived, on top of these platforms for many years. And all for a simple reason: Big Tech says so.

Facebook isn’t the only **capricious** gatekeeper. Other platforms are just as **ruthless**, as Facebook itself pointed out in response to antitrust lawsuits brought by the Federal Trade Commission and state **attorneys** general at the end of 2020. “This restriction is standard in the industry,” a Facebook spokesperson said of the platform’s third-party-neutering practices, citing similar policies at LinkedIn, Pinterest, and Uber, among others.

> [capricious](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/capricious): changing mood or behaviour suddenly and unexpectedly
>
> [ruthless](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/ruthless): not thinking or worrying about any pain caused to others; cruel
>
> [attorney](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/attorney?q=attorneys): a lawyer

The biggest platforms are anticompetitive. Amazon learns which products in its marketplaces are top sellers and then **undercuts** their makers with its own cheap basic versions. While physical retailers like Target and Walmart do this all the time with their own version of generic brands alongside name brands, the difference here is that Amazon is not just the store but the infrastructure. It would be as if Target controlled not just its store shelves but also the roads that all stores build on. This is too much control for one corporation to wield.

> [undercut](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/undercut?q=undercuts): to charge less than a competitor

Google abuses its power too. In addition to charging high mobile payment fees, Google faces scrutiny over using its popular search engine to boost the prominence of its own products over those of its competitors. Many searches today show only sponsored ads, including Google products, **above the fold**, **crowding out** smaller rivals. Google also aggressively collects and tracks user data to improve its ad targeting. Amazon plays a similar game, ranking its own products above others and harvesting people’s data to enlarge its fast-growing, \$38 billion ad business, which trails only Google’s (\$225 billion) and Meta’s (\$114 billion).

> [above/below the fold](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/above-below-the-fold?q=above+the+fold): the part of a web page that can/cannot be seen before you scroll down the page
>
> [crowd someone/something out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/crowd-out): to not allow a person or thing any space or opportunity to grow or develop

Apple commits similar sins. While many people love using Apple’s devices, the company routinely rejects competitors from its App Store and squeezes the ones it lets in—to the point that it is now embroiled in multiple high-profile lawsuits. Epic, the developer of the ultra-popular game Fortnite, is one **plaintiff**, taking Apple to court after the company shut down Epic’s game developers’ ability to access the App Store. Spotify, Tinder, the location tag maker Tile, and others have filed similar complaints over Apple’s high fees and anticompetitive rules.

> [plaintiff](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/plaintiff): someone who makes a legal complaint against someone else in court

Big Tech platforms have more than just a home field advantage. They get to rewrite the rules of the entire game for their sole benefit.

Is that so bad? Many people don’t see a problem with the way things are, or they don’t think much about it. They are satisfied with the comforts afforded by Big Tech. We live in an age of abundance, after all. You can connect to anyone you want (assuming the corporate network owners are okay with it). You can read, watch, and share as much as you like. There are plenty of “free” services to **satiate** us—the price of entry being just our data. (As they say, “If it’s free, then you’re the product.”)

> [satiate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/satiate): to completely satisfy yourself or a need, especially with food or pleasure, so that you could not have any more

Lots of people are happy with **the status quo**. Maybe you too think the trade-off is worth it, or perhaps you see no other **viable** alternative for life online. Either way, whatever your **stance**, one trend is undeniable: centralizing forces are drawing the internet inward, collecting power into the center of what was supposed to be a decentralized network. This inward turn is stifling innovation, making the internet less interesting, less dynamic, and less fair.

> [the status quo](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/status-quo): the present situation
>
> [viable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/viable): able to work as intended or able to succeed
>
> [stance](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/stance): a way of thinking about something, especially expressed in a publicly stated opinion

To the extent that anyone recognizes a problem, they usually assume the only thing that might rein in existing giants is government regulation. That may be part of the solution. But regulation often has the unintended side effect of cementing existing giants’ power. Larger companies can deal with **compliance** costs and **regulatory** complexity that overwhelm smaller upstarts. Red tape restrains newcomers. We need a level playing field. And in service of that, we need thoughtful regulation that respects this fundamental truth: startups and technologies offer a more effective way to check incumbents’ power.

> [compliance](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/compliance): the fact of obeying a particular law or rule, or of acting according to an agreement
>
> [regulatory](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/regulatory): controlling

Moreover, **knee-jerk** regulatory responses ignore what sets the internet apart from other technologies. Many of the usual calls for regulation assume that the internet is similar to past communications networks, like telephone and cable TV networks. But these older, hardware-based networks are different from the internet, a software-based network.

> [knee-jerk reaction, response, etc.](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/knee-jerk?q=knee-jerk+): a quick reaction that does not allow you time to consider something carefully

The internet depends, of course, on physical infrastructure owned by telecom providers, such as cabling, routers, cell towers, and satellites. Historically, this infrastructure has been a strictly neutral transport layer, treating all internet traffic without bias. Today, regulation over “net **neutrality**” is in **flux**, but so far the industry has mostly **upheld** its policies of **nondiscrimination**. In this model, software takes priority. It is the code running at the network edges—on PCs, phones, and servers—that drives the behavior of internet services.

> [neutrality](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/neutrality): a neutral position, especially in a war
>
> [flux](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/flux): continuous change
>
> [uphold](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/uphold?q=upheld): to defend or keep a principle or law, or to say that a decision that has already been made, especially a legal one, is correct
>
> [nondiscrimination](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/non-discrimination?q=nondiscrimination): the practice of treating people, companies, countries, etc. in the same way as others in order to be fair

This code can be upgraded. With the right set of features and incentives, new software can propagate across the internet. Thanks to its **malleable** nature, the internet can be reshaped through innovation and **market forces**.

> [malleable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/malleable): easily influenced, trained, or controlled
>
> [market forces](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/market-forces): the forces that decide price levels in an economy or trading system whose activities are not influenced or limited by government

Software is special because it has a nearly unbounded range of **expressiveness**. Almost anything you can imagine can be encoded in software; software is the encoding of human thought, just like writing or painting or cave drawings. Computers take those encoded thoughts and run them at lightning speeds. This is why Steve Jobs once described the computer as “a bicycle for the mind.” It accelerates our abilities.

> [expressiveness](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/expressiveness): the state of showing what someone thinks or feels

Software is so expressive that it is better thought of not as engineering but as an art form. The plasticity and flexibility of code offer an immensely rich design space, far closer in the breadth of possibilities to creative activities like sculpting and fiction writing than engineering activities like bridge building. As with other art forms, practitioners regularly develop new genres and movements that fundamentally shift what’s possible.

That’s what’s happening today. Just as the internet seemed to be **consolidating** beyond repair, a new software movement emerged that can **reimagine** the internet. The movement has the potential to bring back the spirit of the early internet, secure property rights for creators, reclaim user ownership and control, and break the **stranglehold** Big Tech has on our lives.

> [consolidate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/consolidate?q=consolidating): to become, or cause something to become, stronger, and more certain
>
> [reimagine](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/reimagine): to have a new idea about the way something should be
>
> [stranglehold](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/stranglehold): a position of complete control that prevents something from developing

That’s why I believe there’s a better way and that these are still the early days. The internet can still fulfill the promise of its original vision. Entrepreneurs, technologists, creators, and users can make it happen.

The dream of an open network that **fosters** creativity and entrepreneurship doesn’t have to die.

> [foster](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/foster?q=fosters): to encourage the development or growth of ideas or feelings

## Three Eras of Networks

To understand how we got here, it helps to be familiar with the broad strokes of internet history. Below I’ll provide a brief overview, which I’ll unpack in greater detail in the chapters ahead.

The first thing to know is that power on the internet derives from how networks are designed. Network design—the way nodes connect, interact, and form an **overarching** structure—might seem like an **arcane** technical topic, but it is the single most relevant factor in determining how rights and money are distributed across the internet. Even small initial design decisions can have profound **downstream** consequences on the control and economics of internet services.

> [overarching](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/overarching): most important, because of including or affecting all other areas
>
> [arcane](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/arcane): mysterious and known only by a few people
>
> [downstream](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/downstream): used to describe something that happens later in a process or series of events

Simply put, network design determines outcomes.

Until recently, networks came in two competing types. The first, “protocol networks,” like email and the web, are open systems controlled by communities of software developers and other network stakeholders. These networks are **egalitarian**, democratic, and permissionless: open to anyone and free to access. In these systems, money and power tend to flow to the network edges, **incentivizing** systems to grow around them.

> [egalitarian](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/egalitarian): believing that all people are equally important and should have the same rights and opportunities in life
>
> [incentivize](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/incentivize?q=incentivizing): to make someone want to do something

“Corporate networks” are the second type: networks that companies, instead of communities, own and control. These are like walled gardens with one groundskeeper; they’re theme parks controlled by a single megacorp. Corporate networks run centralized, permissioned services that allow them to quickly develop advanced features, attract investment, and **accrue** profits to reinvest in growth. In these systems, money and power flow to the network center, to companies that own the networks, and away from users and developers at the network edges.

> [accrue](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/accrue): to increase in number or amount over a period of time

I see the history of the internet as **unfolding** in three acts. Each act is marked by a predominating network architecture. In the first act, called the “read era,” circa 1990 to 2005, early internet protocol networks **democratized** information. Anyone could type a few words into a web browser and read about almost any topic through websites. In the second act, the “read-write era,” roughly 2006 to 2020, corporate networks democratized publishing. Anyone could write and publish to mass audiences through posts on social networks and other services. Now a new type of architecture is enabling the internet’s third act.

> [unfold](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/unfold?q=unfolding): If a situation or story unfolds, it develops or becomes clear to other people.
>
> [democratize](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/democratize?q=democratized): to make countries or organizations use democratic ways of making decisions

This architecture represents a natural **synthesis** of the two prior types, and it is democratizing ownership. In the dawning “read-write-own era,” anyone can become a network stakeholder, gaining power and economic upside previously enjoyed by only a small number of corporate **affiliates**, like stockholders and employees. This new era promises to **counteract** Big Tech **consolidation** and return the internet to its dynamic roots.

> [synthesis](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/synthesis): the mixing of different ideas, influences, or things to make a whole that is different, or new
>
> [affiliate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/affiliate?q=affiliates): to cause a group to become part of or form a close relationship with another, usually larger, group, or organization
>
> [counteract](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/counteract): to reduce or remove the effect of something unwanted by producing an opposite effect
>
> [consolidation](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/consolidation): the process of becoming or being made stronger and more certain

People can read and write on the internet, but they can also now own.

## A New Movement

This new movement goes by a few names.

Some people call it “crypto,” since the foundation of its technology is **cryptography**. Others call it “web3,” implying that it is leading to a third era of the internet. I sometimes use these names, but I generally try to stick to well-defined terms like “blockchains” and “blockchain networks,” which are the technologies driving the movement. (Many industry practitioners refer to blockchain networks as protocols, but I avoid this label to better distinguish these networks from protocol networks, two very different concepts in this book.)

> [cryptography](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cryptography): the use of special codes to keep information safe in computer networks

Whichever name you prefer, the core technology of blockchains presents unique advantages, if you know where and how to look.

Some people will tell you that blockchains are a new type of database, one that multiple parties can edit, share, and trust. That’s a start. A better description is that blockchains are a new class of computer, one you can’t put in your pocket or on your desk, as you might with a smartphone or laptop. Nevertheless, blockchains fit the classic definition of computers. They store information and run rules encoded in software that can manipulate that information.

The significance of blockchains lies in the unique way that they, and the networks built on top of them, are controlled. With traditional computers, the hardware controls the software. Hardware exists in the physical world, where an individual or organization owns and controls it. That means that, ultimately, a person or group of people is in charge of both the hardware and the software. People can change their minds and therefore the software they control at any time.

Blockchains invert the hardware-software power relationship, like the internet before them. With blockchains, the software governs a network of hardware devices. The software—in all its expressive glory—is in charge.

Why does this matter? Because blockchains are computers that can, for the first time ever, establish **inviolable** rules in software. This allows blockchains to make strong, software-enforced **commitments** to users. A **pivotal** commitment involves digital ownership, which places economic and governance power in the hands of users.

> [inviolable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/inviolable): that must be respected and not removed or ignored
>
> [commitment](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/commitment): a promise or firm decision to do something
>
> [pivotal](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/pivotal): central and important

You may still be wondering, So what? What problems do blockchains solve?

The ability for blockchains to make strong commitments about how they will behave in the future allows new networks to be created. Blockchain networks solve problems that **plague** earlier network architectures. They can connect people in social networks while empowering users over **corporate** interests. They can **underpin** marketplaces and payment networks that facilitate commerce, but with persistently lower take rates. They can enable new forms of monetizable media, **interoperable** and immersive digital worlds, and artificial intelligence products that compensate—rather than **cannibalize**—creators.

> [plague](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/plague): to cause worry, pain, or difficulty to someone or something over a period of time
>
> [corporate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/corporate): of or shared by a whole group and not just of a single member
>
> [underpin](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/underpin): to give support, strength, or a basic structure to something
>
> [interoperable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/interoperable): If two systems or pieces of equipment are interoperable, they can both work together
>
> [cannibalize](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/cannibalize): to cause a reduction in the sales of an existing product or service by starting to sell a new product or service

So yes, blockchains create networks, but unlike other network architectures—and here’s the key point—they have more desirable outcomes. They can incentivize innovation, reduce taxes on creators, and let the people who contribute to the networks share in decision making and upside.

Asking “What problems do blockchains solve?” is like asking “What problems does steel solve over, say, wood?” You can make a building or railway out of either. But steel gave us taller buildings, stronger railways, and more ambitious public works at the outset of the Industrial Revolution. With blockchains we can create networks that are fairer, more **durable**, and more **resilient** than the networks of today.

> [durable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/durable): able to continue for a long time without failing
>
> [resilient](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/resilient): able to return quickly to a previous good condition after problems

Blockchain networks combine the **societal** benefits of protocol networks with the competitive advantages of corporate networks. Software developers get open access, creators get direct relationships with their audiences, fees are guaranteed to stay low, and users get valuable economic and governance rights. At the same time, blockchain networks have the technical and financial capabilities to compete with corporate networks.

> [societal](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/societal): relating to or involving society

Blockchain networks are a new construction material for building a better internet.

## Seeing the Truth

New technologies are often **controversial**. Blockchains are no exception.

> [controversial](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/controversial): causing disagreement or discussion

Many people associate blockchains with scams and get-rich-quick schemes. There is some truth to these claims, as there was truth to similar claims about tech-driven financial manias of the past, from the railroad boom of the 1830s to the dot-com bubble of the 1990s. The 1990s were full of spectacular failures, such as Pets.com and Webvan. The public discussion mostly focused on IPOs and stock prices, but there were also entrepreneurs and technologists who looked beyond the ups and downs, rolled up their sleeves, and built products and services that eventually delivered on the **hype**. There were **speculators**, but there were also builders.

> [hype](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/hype): a situation in which something is advertised and discussed in newspapers, on television, etc. a lot in order to attract everyone's interest
>
> [speculator](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/speculator?q=speculators): a person who buys goods, property, money, etc. in the hope of selling them at a profit

Today, the same cultural divide exists around blockchains. One group, which I call the casino, is often the much louder of the two, and it is primarily interested in trading and speculation. At its worst, this culture of gambling has led to catastrophes like the bankruptcy of the crypto exchange FTX. This group gets most of the media attention, which influences the public image for the entire category.

The other group, which I call the computer, is the far more serious of the two, and it is motivated by a long-term vision. This group’s practitioners understand that the financial aspects of blockchains are only a means to an end, a way to align incentives toward a larger goal. They realize the real potential in using blockchains is to build better networks, and therefore a better internet. These people are quieter and don’t get as much attention, but they are the ones who will have lasting effects.

This isn’t to say the computer culture isn’t interested in making money. I work in venture capital. Most of the tech industry is profit-driven. The difference is that real innovation takes time to generate financial returns. That’s why most venture capital funds (ours included) are structured as ten-year funds, with purposefully long hold periods. Producing valuable new technologies can take up to a decade and sometimes longer. Computer culture is long term. Casino culture is not.

So, it’s the computer versus the casino battling it out to define the narrative for this software movement. Of course, optimism and cynicism can both be taken too far. The dot-com bubble, followed by bust, reminded many people of that.

The way to see the truth is to separate the essence of a technology from specific uses and misuses of it. A hammer can build a home, or it can demolish one. Nitrogen-based fertilizers help grow crops that feed billions of people, but they can also be used in explosives. Stock markets help societies allocate capital and resources where they can be most productive, but they also enable destructive speculative bubbles. All technologies have the capacity to help or harm; blockchains are no different. The question is, how can we maximize the good while minimizing the bad?

## Determining the Internet’s Future

This book aims to give you an appreciation for the essence of blockchains, the technology—that is, the computer—and all the exciting new things it can do. My hope is that you will, along the way, come to understand exactly what problems blockchains solve and why the solutions they present are so urgently needed.

The thinking, firsthand observations, and mental models I share here are the result of my experiences over the course of a twenty-five-year career in the internet industry. I started as a software developer, then became an entrepreneur in the 2000s. I sold two companies, one to McAfee and the other to eBay. Along the way, I took up investing, placing early bets on companies such as Kickstarter, Pinterest, Stack Overflow, Stripe, Oculus, and Coinbase, all of which have products in wide use today. I have been a longtime advocate for community-owned software and networks, and I have been blogging on the topic, as well as technology and startups, since 2009.

My own path into blockchain networks began in the early 2010s after reflecting on the failure of protocol networks like RSS, an open-source publishing protocol, against corporate-owned rivals like Facebook and Twitter. These experiences turned me toward a new model of investing, one that guides my philosophy today.

I believe to understand the internet’s future, you must understand its past. To that end, in part 1 of the book, I chart the history of the internet, focusing on the two most recent eras from the early 1990s through today.

In part 2, I dive deeper into blockchains, explaining how they work and why they matter. I show how blockchains and tokens can be used to construct blockchain networks, and explain the technical and economic mechanisms by which they work.

In part 3, I show how blockchain networks empower users and other network participants, answering the “why blockchains?” question people often ask.

In part 4, I address controversial questions head-on, including policy and regulatory topics and the harmful casino culture that has developed around blockchains that hurts their public perception and undermines their potential.

Finally, in part 5, building on the history and concepts presented earlier, I go deeper into intersecting areas like social networks, video games, virtual worlds, media businesses, collaborative creation, finance, and artificial intelligence. I hope to give a flavor for the power of blockchain networks, and how they can underpin better versions of existing applications along with new applications that weren’t possible before.

This book encapsulates what I’ve learned throughout my internet career. I’ve had the privilege to work with many outstanding entrepreneurs and technologists. Much of what I discuss here, I learned from them. I hope that whether you’re a builder, founder, corporate leader, policymaker, analyst, journalist, or someone who just wants to understand what is happening and where we’re all headed, this book can help you build, navigate, and participate in the future.

Blockchain networks are, I argue, the most credible and civic-minded force to counterbalance internet consolidation. I believe this is the beginning, not the end, of internet innovation. There’s an urgency to that conviction, though: the United States is already losing its lead in this new movement, with the share of global software developers here going from 40 percent to 29 percent in the past five years. The rapid rise of artificial intelligence will also likely accelerate the trend toward Big Tech consolidation. Artificial intelligence holds incredible promise but tends to favor well-capitalized companies with large accumulations of data.

The decisions we make now will determine the internet’s future: who builds, owns, and uses it; where innovation happens; and what the experience will be for everyone. Blockchains, and the networks they enable, unlock the extraordinary power of software as an art form, with the internet as its canvas. The movement has an opportunity to change the course of history, to remake humanity’s relationship to the digital, to reimagine what’s possible. Anyone can participate—whether you’re a developer, creator, entrepreneur, or user.

This is a chance to create the internet you want, not the internet you inherited.

-- 35:55