### Chapter Three

If Waters had noticed Olive Morton’s cryptic note, he never mentioned it, but in other respects he was sharp. Smith learned that after graduating he had joined the force; he had already been placed on the accelerated development scheme, meaning that somebody somewhere thought he was destined for great things. He was not afraid to question some of the ideas that Smith put forward, some of which were deliberately daft, just to see if he would, but he did so sensibly, respectfully, in a way that would encourage more senior officers to work positively with him. And he had ideas of his own – an unreported motor boat might have hit Fletcher; he might have dived or fallen into the water, hit his head on a tree trunk or some underwater object.

‘What about the mystery canoeist?’ said Smith.

‘I don’t see how anyone could paddle a canoe fast enough to knock someone out in the water.’

Smith nodded in agreement and left him to think it over as he drank the lukewarm last of the second mug of coffee. Waters stood up and walked over to the window – they had been sitting at the desk for more than an hour.

‘Perhaps Wayne was a good swimmer. Perhaps he caught up with the canoe…’

Smith shuffled the papers together and put them back into the file, adding in the rough notes that they had made as they talked it over.

‘We’ve exhausted this lot. We need more data, more **gen**. Let’s phone some people up. Phone the school this lot go to, St Martin’s, Upham. I’ve got to go there next week, would you believe, and lecture them about the dangers of drugs… Another of life’s delightful little ironies. I know they’ll not be open yet but find a number, get hold of the principal or a senior teacher. Make up some reason why you’ve had to call – professional courtesy before speaking to their students again about Wayne Fletcher’s tragic death – that should go down well. But what you’re after is a bit of background on these two.’

> [gen](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gen): information about a particular subject

He flicked the folder open again – ‘Melanie Carter and Steven Neale. How are they seen by the school, the teachers? Honest? Reliable? Mature? Are they academic, university types? How well should they have known Wayne Fletcher? Make sure we’ve got phone numbers for both of them. In fact, give them a ring, too, and see if they’re available this afternoon, just a routine follow up. If they are, tell them we’ll ring back with a definite time.’

Waters was making notes as Smith ran through it. When he finished, he looked up.

‘Are they – suspects?’

Smith couldn’t hide a smile.

‘I doubt it. But on the other hand, we don’t know what happened, do we? So we don’t **rule anything out**. Use O’Leary’s desk, he won’t mind.’

> [rule something or someone out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/rule-out?q=ruled+something+out): to decide or say officially that something is impossible or will not happen, or that something or someone is not suitable

Frosty Winters was reading the memo for the fourth or fifth time when the phone on his desk began to ring. He didn’t want to answer it, didn’t particularly want to do anything apart from drive to the county police headquarters and kick down the door of Assistant Chief Constable Devine’s office before telling him exactly where he could stick his reorganization strategy.

‘DS Winters – if it’s a diver you want, try Chelsea Football Club.’

‘Frosty? What are you on about?’

‘Who is this?’

The voice was half familiar, a voice from the past.

‘Smith.’

‘Which one?’

‘Oh, this is **doing wonders for** my **self-esteem**! How many Smiths do you actually know who would ring you up, recognize your voice and still want to talk to you, knowing how ugly you are?’

> [self-esteem](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/self-esteem): belief and confidence in your own ability and value
>
> [do wonders for something/someone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/do-wonders-for): to cause improvements or have a very good effect

‘DC?’

‘Thank you.’

‘Christ! I heard you were still at it. At Kings Lake? Been a bit of bother over there?’

‘Nothing to do with me, I was at home watching television with the cat. No-one can **corroborate** my statement, which is how I prefer things these days.’

> [corroborate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/corroborate): to add proof to an account, statement, idea, etc. with new information

‘How are you, DC?’

‘Can’t complain, Frosty. Or rather, I can’t be bothered to complain any more. No point.’

‘Still living at the same place, on the Millfield?’

‘Yes, I’m at the nicer end where the youngsters only torture each other’s pets.’

‘Must be hard, though. A lot of memories, you and Sheila.’

There was a pause and Winters wondered whether he had spoken out of turn; the two men had not met for a couple of years, though before that there had been cases that brought them together. On a few occasions, the four of them, the two men and their wives, had gone out together.

‘Well, we **get by**. We go on, don’t we? How is Margaret?’

> [get by](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/get-by): to be able to live or deal with a situation with difficulty, usually by having just enough of something you need, such as money

‘Yes, she’s good, DC.’

‘Give her my regards.’

‘I will – and she’ll send hers to you, I know.’

‘So what’s all this about Chelsea? A most unprofessional way to answer the telephone, I have to say.’

‘They’re shutting us down, DC, the bloody **brass** and suits between them are shutting us down. Reorganisation, **rationalization**, they can call it what they like – this unit shuts down in six months. After twenty five years. When I think about all the good blokes have risked their necks out of here… Still, I don’t need to tell you what it’s all about.’

> [brass](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/brass): high-ranking officers in an organization, esp. the military
>
> [rationalization](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/rationalization): the process of making a company, way of working, etc. more effective, usually by combining or stopping particular activities

But he did, and Smith listened, and asked questions and sympathized because he knew that nobody else would, nobody but a colleague who had been through something similar would understand the sense of frustration, the sense of betrayal. The county’s police diving team was rarely called out unless there was something horrible to be done but Winters had run it well; now ‘financial constraints’ would be given as a reason why he would have to break the news to two or three men, why the building would be sold off, why they would either transfer to a new combined unit in a neighbouring county or take up other duties. Winters had a couple of years to go to make his thirty; he would see it out but without commitment and without loyalty. Smith had seen it all before, and was seeing it increasingly now.

‘Anyway, DC, this wasn’t a social call, was it? What can I do for you?’

‘Bugger it if we can’t have a catch-up now and then. That’s half the trouble, isn’t it, people like you and me, we’re not efficient, are we? But you’re right, I have a motive for this call, for which I apologise.’

‘I’m guessing this is the lad we pulled out of the river near Upham Market?’

‘That’s it. Straightforward, was it? I saw your name in the log.’

‘Yes, me and Tim, last Sunday. I was doing a barbecue when they called us. Ask away.’

‘How long did it take to find him?’

‘Couple of hours. Longer than I’d expected - the river isn’t that big up there.’

‘Why did it take that long?’

‘There’s a channel down the centre, about eight feet deep. It’s where you normally find them before they blow up and float. We searched there first, up and down about half a mile.’

‘So where was he?’

‘In the edge, more or less, in a patch of lily pads and underneath some trees overhanging the water. It’s pretty overgrown in parts. Tim found him by just wading along the margin.’

‘No great depth then?’

‘Three feet I’d say. Maybe four.’

‘So had the current washed him into there?’

‘There isn’t much of a current, DC. It’s only a **fenland** drain, really.’

> [fen](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/fen?q=fenland): an area of low, flat, wet land in England

A pause. Winters could sense the other man’s mind at work, probing away at the new facts, trying to make sense of the location of the body; it was a little odd, now he came to think about it.

‘Thanks, Frosty, that’s definitely helped. Did you happen to notice how far he was from that field where he went in, where the kids were parked?’

‘Yes, we went in from the same place. About a hundred yards upstream. We must have gone past the body half a dozen times before we found him.’

‘A hundred yards… Is that all? Could he have drowned further upstream and then drifted down to where you found him?’

For the first time, Winters hesitated. Up to this point it had been about facts; now Smith was asking him to speculate.

‘Well, it’s like I said, DC. If you go and have a look, you’ll see what I mean. At this time of the year, the river hardly flows. I don’t see how what current there was could have pushed the body into where we found it.’

‘And you have it all on video, where it was before you pulled him out? Sorry, Frosty, I know I sound like I think you’re my grandma – I’m just thinking it through.’

‘Not a problem, DC. It’s all here plus copies of the stills. If you want, I can send you everything.’

‘I’ll let you know about that, I’ve seen enough video nasties to **last me out**, I think. Nothing else comes to mind, no signs of any disturbance on the bank, anything at all?’

> [last out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/last-out?q=+last+out): to manage to stay alive

‘Sorry, DC. As far as we were concerned, it was a find-the-body job. I just remember thinking it was a shame. But then, it usually is.’

‘Why did you think that?’

‘Well… He was a big, strong lad, well built. A bit of an athlete I should think. He took some lifting into the boat.’

‘I see. Frosty, you’ve been a great help. Don’t let the bastards **grind you down**. If you ever want to get that particular bastard called Devine in a dark alley one night, you let me know. Do they record all these calls now?’

> [grind someone down](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/grind-down?q=grind+you+down): to treat someone so badly for such a long time that they are no longer able to fight back

‘Yes, I think so, DC.’

‘Good. Thanks a lot, Frosty.’

‘We should meet up, DC. Have a drink… Old times and that.’

‘Yes, we could do that.’

‘I’ll speak to Maggie, give you a call.’

‘Why not? Take care, Frosty.’

Waters was still finishing the phone calls that he had been asked to make. Smith busied himself at his desk, appearing not to listen but keeping one ear on the half of the conversation he could hear and mentally constructing the other. The boy was clear and confident on the phone, and seemed to have his wits about him; whoever he spoke to from the school obviously wanted to be told more than he should be, and Waters deflected that as well as some more experienced officers would have done. With the witnesses he was reassuring but firm. One of them, Smith couldn’t tell which yet, had other plans for this afternoon but by the end of the call had agreed to be collected at two o’clock.

‘Where are we picking them up from?’

‘Melanie Carter’s home.’

‘Both of them?’

‘Yes, sir.’

Smith waited with no expression until Waters remembered.

‘Oh, right. Sorry… But I don’t know what to call you. If we’re going to be working together, you’ll have to give me a clue.’

‘I’m not sure that we’re officially Starsky and Hutch, or ever going to be. This is, as I understand it, just an introduction that will show you how not to do anything.’

‘So what I just did I shouldn’t have done?’

‘Letting a rookie speak unsupervised to **material** witnesses on his first day? Probably not. But as regards this name business, you will have noticed people calling me ‘DC’, either because they wish it was my rank or because they are also my initials. I don’t mind which. The letters have also been perceived to stand for other combinations of insulting words over the years but we needn’t go into that. We’ll try ‘DC’ and see how it goes, right?’

> [material](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/material): important or having an important effect

‘OK, DC. Just one other question.’

‘Fire away.’

‘Who are Starsky and Hutch?’

‘Google it. Tell me about our dates for this afternoon.’

Waters read back from the notes he had made on the standard issue pad, filling in with comments of his own based on the conversations he had had with them. Melanie Carter was an able student, more mature than most; the deputy head had expressed surprise that she had been there at all. She had held positions of responsibility in the school and was expected to gain a good university place.

‘In what subject?’ asked Smith.

‘I don’t know – I didn’t ask. Is it important?’

‘No. Carry on.’

Steven Neale was also a capable student, would also go to university. He was something of a reformed character, having been a troublesome boy in his early years at St Martin’s. Nevertheless, the deputy head would “Take his word in a serious matter such as this.”

‘Which one didn’t want to revisit the scene?’

‘How did…? Steven Neale, says he has a holiday job and won’t get paid.’

‘Very public-spirited. They both knew Wayne Fletcher well?’

‘For at least six years.’

‘Well done.’

Smith swivelled his chair away from the conversation. He would have preferred to pick up the two of them separately, perhaps even in different cars, but these days, what with mobiles and texts and Facebooks they’d have spoken to each other anyway – were probably discussing it right now. How long could he give this? Having Waters around for a couple of days might be a useful **smokescreen**, as it happened, but he would need something by the end of the day if he was not signing it off.

> [smokescreen](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/smokescreen): something that hides the truth about someone's intentions

‘So what do you want me to do next, DC?’

‘This isn’t the prettiest business to be starting off with. You sure you’re alright with it?’

Yes, he was. Smith could see that if Waters was on a lead, he’d be pulling at it now, eager to get into the field – that always needed careful watching. Something to sober him up just a little, then.

‘Call back the chap I was just speaking to, Frosty Winters. He runs the police diving unit over at Hunston – they took the body out of the river. Send him my apologies, say Smith has gone senile and would like to see the video after all. Get him to attach it or whatever they do and send it here right away, to me. It’s all logged on. No doubt you could just hack your way in anyway…When it arrives, watch it, make notes of anything interesting. It won’t be very cheerful viewing, I can tell you. If DI Reeve asks what you’re doing, just say exactly what I told you to do.’

As he copied the number from Smith’s address book, Waters said, ‘Will do. What should I say if anyone asks where you are?’

‘Tell them I’ve gone to take a look at the real thing.’