### Chapter Four

He stood on the **paving** **slabs** outside the police mortuary, debating whether to smoke the first of the three cigarettes that he allowed himself each day. Would it do him more good after seeing the body? It was a while since he had done this but at one time it had become almost a habit. On three occasions in his career he had needed to be present at the autopsy itself, something that seemed to happen often on the television but which was a rarity in most detectives’ working lives. Of course, he might not actually need to see it at all.

> [pave](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/pave): to cover an area of ground with a hard, flat surface of pieces of stone, concrete, or bricks
>
> [slab](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/slab): a thick, flat piece of a solid substance, such as stone, wood, metal, food, etc., that is usually square or rectangular

Olive Markham looked up as he opened the door into the **anteroom**. She had hardly changed since he had last seen her, the long, oval face and horn-rimmed glasses just as he remembered them, and he wanted to make some joke about **embalming** **fluid**, not that any such thing had ever been used here. As he approached and took her hand, he read the identity badge and complimented her on the promotion to Senior Mortuary Technician.

> [anteroom](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/anteroom): a small room, especially a waiting room, that leads into a larger, more important room
>
> [embalm](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/embalm?q=embalming): to use chemicals to prevent a dead body from decaying
>
> [fluid](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/fluid): a substance that flows and is not solid

‘I am still the only one, Mr Smith. I had an assistant **all-too**-briefly but he is no longer with us.’

> [all too](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/all-too): used before an adjective or adverb to emphasize a negative meaning

‘Oh dear. I hope he moved on rather than **passed on**. That would be taking one’s work too seriously, wouldn’t it?’

> [pass on](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/pass-on): polite expression for die 

‘Darren was a victim of the thousand cuts, as we will all ultimately be. One can only wonder at the secret of your own **longevity** in these **inauspicious** times.’

> [longevity](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/longevity): living for a long time
>
> [inauspicious](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/inauspicious): showing signs that something will not be successful or positive

‘Ah, well. I expect it’s something to do with what someone has already said this morning. I know where the bodies are buried.’

‘Mmm… Most amusing.’

She was labelling sample bags but fortunately they were empty. He waited until she chose to finish or interrupt the job; this was very much her domain and he was in no hurry to **get on the wrong side of her**.

> [get on the right/wrong side of someone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/get-on-the-right-wrong-side-of?q=get+on+the+wrong+side): to make someone pleased/annoyed with you

As she folded the final bag, she said, ‘Someone once said that life is a meditation on death. I hope you kept up your practice.’

‘I did, do, more or less. Not every day, but most of them.’

She smiled briefly, and he saw just a raising of the eyebrows.

‘And what can I do for you today? We are open for business.’

He showed her the report in the file that he had brought with him, just to be sure there had been no mistake. Yes, she said, she had added the note; would he like to see copies of the photographs that she had taken? They were digital, of course, and as she loaded them onto the screen, he looked around at the quiet, clean and **immaculately** tidy room; it was hard to believe what tragedies and horrors had, in their time, lain out on tables beyond the double doors behind him.

> [immaculately](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/immaculately): in a way that is perfectly clean or tidy

The first image was on the screen – the upper torso and head, rather **lurid** in the camera’s flash, but the eyes closed as if in sleep rather than death. The features, when he looked more closely, had the slightly **misshapen** or bloated appearance that he recalled seeing on other victims of drowning. Olive said nothing, pointed at nothing, the cursor hovering over the arrow that would take them to the next picture when he was ready. On the right side of the head, on the curve of the temple, Smith could see the oval bruise, some four inches long and two inches wide.

> [lurid](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/lurid): (especially of a description) shocking because involving violence, sex, or immoral activity
>
> [misshapen](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/misshapen): having an unusual shape or the wrong shape

He nodded and was then looking at a larger image, just the boy’s head now, and the bruise at the centre like a dark cloud on a pale, clay-coloured sky. Difficult to guess his age now, with the life washed out of him – he could be thirty, even thirty seven, twenty years older than he actually was when he died. Smith peered at the screen, remembering the note on the autopsy report. The bruise had different colours – red into purple, violet into green – but nothing that he could see was suspicious, nothing… He didn’t want to think it, let alone say it… Nothing fishy.

Without being told, and probably guessing at his thoughts, Olive Markham clicked on the arrow again. Now the bruise filled the screen. With the end of a silver fountain pen, she slowly traced an invisible line through the bruise, two then three times – and suddenly it was no longer invisible to him. Smith could see the shape of the fish, the simple Christian symbol one sees as a sticker on cars; the pointed oval body, the triangular tail. It wasn’t obvious or sharply defined but it was there. It wasn’t just a line, when you studied it – the whole fish was a little darker and more solid than the rest of the bruise – a bruise within a bruise.

Smith said, ‘What do you **make of** that?’

> [make something of something/someone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/make-of): to understand the meaning of a statement or action, or to have an opinion about something or someone

‘I’m not a **believer**, Mr Smith. I don’t think this is a sign from above. I just think it’s odd. I just thought that it shouldn’t pass without – comment.’

> [believer](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/believer): a person who has a religious belief or who strongly believes that something is right or good

‘You pointed it out to Dr Robinson. What did he say?’

‘An odd little coincidence **exploited** by our over-active imaginations. I wouldn’t have said that I had one of those.’

> [exploit](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/exploit?q=exploited): to use something for your own benefit

Smith looked closely at the screen again. It was easy enough not to see it but, on the other hand, once you had seen it, it wouldn’t quite disappear completely. It could, conceivably, have been made by some knot or **protuberance** on a branch or some other underwater **obstruction**. And being where it was, and in the medium it was, the edges were not sharply defined – there was an inevitable vagueness to it, as if it were an old tattoo **diffusing** itself into the surrounding skin. But the boy was only seventeen.

> [protuberance](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/protuberance): something that sticks out from a surface
>
> [obstruction](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/obstruction): something that blocks a road, passage, entrance, etc. so that nothing can go along it, or the act of blocking something in this way
>
> [diffuse](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/diffuse?q=diffusing): to (cause something to) spread in many directions

‘He doesn’t have any tattoos or anything anywhere else, does he?’

‘No.’

Olive was a scientist as far as Smith was concerned, at least as capable as Robinson himself of giving clear answers to puzzled policemen, but he caught a note, just the tiniest note of uncertainty in that single syllable, and looked up at her from the screen.

‘Is there something else?’

‘Not in these photographs.’

‘Oh.’

He guessed what was coming next – perhaps today should have been a four-cigarette day after all.

‘This body came to us more quickly than most, and the fact that he drowned affects the rate of certain processes. Obviously, I’m in no position to speculate, but you know that things continue to change even after death, even in the cabinets.’

Smith nodded, waiting for her to unzip the bag. He didn’t think anyone ever really got used to this, except perhaps those who worked here for eight or ten hours a day – and even they must have adapted in some way, it must change them, though he didn’t want to think about how. The old zips used to make a noise – this one was silent.

Olive Markham did not take the zip all the way down but Smith was reminded immediately of Frosty’s words; though Wayne Fletcher hadn’t been tall, not six feet anyway, he had been broad and muscular in the arms and chest, well built for a boy of his age. It was always worse when they were young. One of the girls had only been sixteen… Juliet Richardson. You looked at them, you couldn’t help it, and thought, that womb will never give birth, those breasts will never feed a child. Wayne no doubt thought he was the man – even in death the face had that **truculent** look about it – but he’d done nothing, had hardly lived, knew little of life’s real delights and disasters, except this final, **untimely** catastrophe.

> [truculent](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/truculent): unpleasant and likely to argue a lot
>
> [untimely](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/untimely): Something bad that is untimely happens unexpectedly early or at a time that is not suitable

The Senior Mortuary Technician was waiting for him to adjust and get back into role. He looked at her and shrugged, admitting that he could not see what she had seen.

‘It isn’t much. This bruising has appeared since the autopsy – but I don’t think it was caused by it.’

She pointed to the lower chest, to the side of the **sternum**. The **incision** had been neatly stitched up – Olive’s work – but on both sides of it he could see faint **discolouration**, just a few square inches of it. He leaned in to take a closer look and caught the smell of the body and the surgical processes that it had undergone – an odd combination of the operating room and a butcher’s shop. He drew back.

> [sternum](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/sternum): the breastbone
>
> [incision](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/incision): an opening that is made in something with a sharp tool, especially in someone's body during an operation
>
> [discolouration](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/discoloration?q=discolouration): a change to the original colour of something that makes it look unpleasant or damaged

‘I see. Not much to go on, is it?’

Now it was her moment to shrug and say nothing. A part of Smith, the lazy, let’s have an easy life for a change part, wanted to leave this, sign the papers, dead-bat the brief, **quizzical** look from DI Reeve and go for a cup of tea with Budgie’s mum. He could take that decision now, and not ask Olive the question; no-one would ever be any the wiser.

> [quizzical](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/quizzical): seeming to ask a question without saying anything

‘Any thoughts? Off the record, obviously.’

‘The only time we see bruising there, under normal circumstances, is when someone has attempted CPR, and then only if they’ve been a little over-enthusiastic. Or if it’s done by someone that doesn’t know their own strength.’

Smith didn’t try to conceal his surprise.

‘Are you saying someone tried to revive him? And then put him back in the water when it failed?’

‘No. I’m saying that the only ti-’

He waved away the rest of the reply, acknowledging his error.

‘It is possible that…?’

‘It’s what I suppose you would call **circumstantial** evidence of that possibility.’

> [circumstantial](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/circumstantial): containing information, especially about a crime, that makes you think something is true but does not completely prove it

‘Christ!’

‘An even more remote possibility but I suppose…’

She was staring at the bruise on the boy’s head. Smith did the same but the colours had changed since the photographs were taken and he could not make out any shape at all now.

‘Well, we’re in no-man’s-land again. Not enough to go on, but just too much to let it go. Thanks, Olive.’

‘It has always been a pleasure, Mr Smith,’ entirely avoiding his sarcasm.

She already had the camera ready on the adjacent table.

‘Yes, get some snaps before it all fades away. I don’t want the last place I see this to be in one of my nightmares. Email it up to me. Good work, Dr Markham.’

Outside on the paving slabs again, he lit up a cigarette and breathed in the first smoke deeply. Why couldn’t the smoke ever stay like that to the end? Because each draw contaminates that which is yet to come – the longer you smoke it, the less enjoyable it becomes. The day was cooler and the sky greyer than yesterday, and the hot weather of just a week ago was already a memory. August was almost over. He drew on the cigarette again and breathed one word through the smoke as it left his mouth.

‘Christ!’