### Chapter Five

If he had thought about it at all, Christopher Waters would have imagined that a Detective Sergeant, ex Detective Chief Inspector, with at least thirty years of service, would have owned a better car. He had walked on past the early model Peugeot diesel saloon in the station car park and Smith had called him back to it – and the passenger door had opened with a creak, a little reluctantly, as if it was not used to visitors. Inside, he noticed the CDs pushed into the glove compartment, scraps of paper, the pencils, the loose change accumulating in the well designed to take a cup – a very continental touch – the AA membership book that was a couple of years out-of-date, and the scattering of gravel in the driver’s foot-well. The interior of the car was not dirty, not disgusting, but neither was it that of car that was loved; it had a job to do, this car, and probably just got on with it without too many complaints.

Waters knew well enough why DC had suggested that he send for and watch the video from the diving team, and he made no attempt to hide the effects of seeing it through three or four times. When Smith reappeared in the office, he had simply said, ‘Alright?’ and Waters had nodded – they had not discussed it since. Waters had spent some time completing his training logbook, while Smith retrieved the folder and spent a good while re-reading all the statements made during the initial investigation. After lunch, Smith had asked him if he’d found the canteen alright; when Waters asked where he had eaten, Smith had said that he hadn’t much appetite today – a **gesture** of **solidarity** perhaps, an admission that he too had been affected by his visit to the mortuary.

> [gesture](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/gesture): an action that expresses your feelings or intentions, although it might have little practical effect
>
> [solidarity](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/solidarity): agreement between and support for the members of a group, especially a political group

As they left the town, Smith took him through the plan of action for what they were about to do. As far as the two students were concerned, they were going to be spoken to briefly at Melanie Carter’s home about their statements, as a matter of routine – but what Smith wanted was to take them out to Vine’s Drove, to the spot where Wayne Fletcher had last been seen alive. They might object – they might not. If parents were at home, they might want to get involved… It could go all sorts of ways. It was important that no-one gave or got the impression that the youngsters themselves were under any kind of suspicion. 

‘Are they?’ Waters asked.

‘It’s like I said earlier. We don’t rule any possibilities out – but I very much doubt whether these two are hiding anything other than who brought the **blow** to the party.’

> [blow](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/blow): UK slang: cannabis;  US slang: cocaine

‘The what?’

‘The cannabis or **skunk** or whatever they were playing about with.’

> [skunk](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/skunk): skunkweed: a type of strong cannabis

‘So what’s the idea in taking them back there?’

‘I want to see it for myself, and I want to be able to ask them questions about it there and then – saves a lot of time and phoning people up again.’

Waters was silent, thinking it over.

Smith continued, ‘And yes, I want to see how they behave. It’s possible that being back there, they will recall some small detail which they think, which they thought at the time, was unimportant.’

He hadn’t told Waters about the bruising on the body, just in case he let something slip; the last thing Smith wanted was a rumour going around that Wayne Fletcher’s death was not a tragic accident. In a day or two, the boy would be moved on anyway; no sense in getting him over-excited about a potential murder investigation, was there?

That was the first time that Smith had allowed himself to think the word in connection with the case. Before then it had been simply a shadow in the half-light, a glimpse of a figure on the edge of his vision, a **sensation** in the pit of his stomach that he had never expected to feel again.

> [sensation](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/sensation): a general feeling caused by something that happens to you, especially a feeling that you cannot describe exactly

As Smith turned into Vine’s Drove, he felt the tension rise amongst the other three occupants of the car. It was a straight track of some two hundred yards – he could see the rise at the end where it passed over the flood-bank and onto the water meadow where people parked their cars in the summer months. And as the car passed over the rise, Smith noticed a small piece of black and yellow tape attached to a barbed wire fence and fluttering in the breeze – ‘Police Investigation – Please keep Away’ it would say if they stopped to read it. Some idiot had not cleaned up properly.

It was not the girl who had objected, after all, but Steven Neale; the youth had tried to make it seem as if it would be too distressing for her but it was clear enough that he himself did not fancy going back there. ‘Really, Steve, it’s OK,’ she’d said, and the boy’s eyes went from her to Smith. Anger and fear were there, and it was difficult to say which came first.

They stood close to the car initially, as if it offered some sort of safe point, a reconnection with the normality that had **eluded** them since the death, and Smith deliberately let the moment extend itself into uncertainty. Waters was uncomfortable, too. Smith looked away down the river, saying nothing but thinking grimly to himself that their three ages combined together barely added up to his own… Well, children, this is life, or at least this is how it sometimes ends.

> [elude](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/elude?q=eluded): If something eludes you, you do not succeed in achieving it

He asked the girl if she was alright to continue, but his eyes were on the boy. She nodded – petite, blonde, with a brave little chin that any father would be proud of. So he asked her to show them where the group had been sitting that afternoon, and she walked down towards the river’s edge and pointed at the short, summer-dry **turf**. Automatically Smith looked for signs that people had been sitting here but too many days had passed already. Then he asked her simple, factual questions, nodding and encouraging her until he felt she was over the worst of it, at least for now.

> [turf](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/turf): a surface layer of land consisting of grass and the earth in which its roots grow

‘And when that first canoe went by, the one the other boys went after, Wayne was on the bank here. With Nadia, wasn’t he?’

‘Yes.’

‘Were they an item?’

‘What the hell has that got to do with anything?’

Steven’s voice was higher pitched and more emotional than he had intended; there was a moment’s silence as all three turned to him in surprise.

‘I don’t see the point of that, or of this!’

He waved his arm at the river and the meadow but ended up pointing accusingly at Smith.

‘Well, Steven, that’s understandable. I wouldn’t expect you to see the point of it because you’ve never been in this situation before and, God willing, you’ll never be in it again.’

The hand dropped away. Smith could see that the youth was close to tears, and he could also see that the girl had noticed that too; he had to be careful not to **alienate** her.

> [alienate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/alienate): to cause someone or a group of people to stop supporting and agreeing with you

‘But, sadly, I have been in this situation before, several times. I have to ask you to trust me.’

Another silence while all present considered, in their different ways, their response to the quietly spoken words.

‘As much as we might like this just to be about the facts, it never is. It never can be because people are always more complicated than facts. It’s a great help to me if I can get a sense of what sort of person Wayne was – it might help me to understand why he did what he did. Because what he did in some way or other led to his death, didn’t it?’

The girl put a hand on Steven’s arm and looked up at Smith.

‘Yes, they went out together. It was an **on and off** thing but they were getting quite close again. I always thought they’d end up together.’

> [on and off](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/on-and-off): If something happens on and off during a period of time, it happens sometimes

‘So although Wayne was a bit **miffed** about leaving the college, he had some good things going on as well, yes? He was cheerful that afternoon, his usual self?’

> [miffed](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/miffed): annoyed at someone's behaviour towards you

She nodded.

‘And he was fit, wasn’t he? I mean that in the old-fashioned sense, obviously.’

This time she had half a smile for him and he relaxed a little, sensing that he had regained her confidence.

‘What was his sport? He was a very well-built lad, looked as if he worked out somewhere.’

Steven spoke again, this time with more self-control.

‘How do you know that?’

‘Because I’ve been to see him, son. Another part of my job, I’m afraid.’

He knew that would be a **jolt** for them; the living, especially the young, let the body of the **departed** go quickly. They had not thought of the cold corpse patiently waiting for its final **rites** of passage out of this world and into some other.

> [jolt](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/jolt): an unpleasant shock or surprise
>
> [the departed](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/departed): a person who has died, or people who have died
>
> [rite](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/rite?q=rites): (a usually religious ceremony with) a set of fixed words and actions

‘He was a good rugby player. He had trials for the county a couple of years ago. He could have made it if he hadn’t been lazy about training.’

Smith saw the pain in the boy’s face, the conflict ever present between telling the truth and speaking ill of the dead.

‘Thank you. A great shame then, isn’t it, a terrible waste. So I’m getting the impression that young Wayne could look after himself. If he got involved, say, in a bit of a **punch up**, he’d usually be alright.’

> [punch-up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/punch-up): a fight

To his surprise, they both spoke at once, eager to share memories about that.

‘God, yes!’

‘Nobody **messed with him** after year eight!’

> [mess with someone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/mess-with?q=messed+with): to treat someone in a bad, rude, or annoying way, or to start an argument with someone

‘Why? What happened then?’

Steven Neale said, ‘A couple of year ten boys **had it in for him**. They started bullying him on the way to school. One day Wayne decided he’d had enough, and they both ended up at the doctor’s surgery. He should have done boxing rather than rugby, I told him that.’

> [have it in for someone](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/have-it-in-for?q=have+it+in+for+me): to be determined to harm or criticize someone

Smith had all he wanted about the boy by now but the question had opened up some sort of release and for the next five minutes or so he let them talk about Wayne. There were some tears but also a few smiles.

As that was coming to a natural end, Smith caught Waters’ eye and gave him a silent, nodded invitation to ask any question that was on his mind.

‘Thanks very much, both of you. This has been really helpful, and we know it isn’t easy. Before we go, may I just ask a couple more things about that afternoon?’

They were looking at Waters now, willing to help.

‘It’s probably not important but the second canoeist has never come forward. It might be that he was a visitor to the area and hasn’t seen the local news. Can you remember anything else about him, anything since you made your statements?’

A good start, thought Smith – reasonable, reassuring, encouraging but not **giving away** much about the officers’ own **lines of inquiry**.

> [give away something](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/give-away?q=giving+away): to tell a secret or show your feelings unintentionally
>
> [line of enquiry](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/line-of-enquiry): a series of questions that need to be asked in order to find out more about a particular topic

‘He was on his own. About forty, maybe?’

‘No way, not that old - in his early thirties.’

Smith would take the girl’s judgment on that – the man was probably in his thirties.

She said then, ‘He was wearing a black T shirt – I think we said that. He had quite muscly arms… And he paddled the canoe quite fast, like he’d done it before.’

‘Something odd though was…’

The hesitation was picked up, perhaps too quickly, by Waters.

‘Yes? What was odd?’

The boy said, ‘Well, he never really looked at us. I mean, you would, wouldn’t you? A load of people on the bank, making a noise, and one of them diving in as you were going by? I remember him just kind of glancing once and then back to pulling the oar through the water.’

‘Was there anything else in the canoe? Behind him or in front of him?’

A good question, the kind that comes to you instinctively.

Melanie and Steven looked at each other, both trying to picture the canoeist and the canoe as they slid by again on the stream of memory.

‘There was something behind him. A green bag?’

‘It was a rucksack, I think.’

‘Quite big, if we could see it from the bank.’

‘He might have been camping, it might have been a tent and stuff.’

‘So it was a two-man canoe?’

All eyes turned to Smith.

The girl said, ‘It must have been – but I didn’t notice that until now.’

‘And that’s why we’re here, just to see if anything else comes back to us. It almost always does. Can I repeat what Detective Constable Waters has already said? You have been very helpful and – and I don’t mean this to be in any way patronizing – very brave. I know how painful this can be. But if it helps us to understand what happened to your friend, well, that makes it worthwhile. Thank you.’

He half-gestured to the car and they obediently turned and made their way towards it – sometimes Smith couldn’t understand why teachers ever had any trouble with them. Waters looked a little puzzled, no doubt disappointed at not being able to ask another dozen questions.

‘Good effort. Nice question about what else was in the canoe. They don’t know anything else, just a couple of decent kids. None of them was ‘involved’ as we say. But I’d like to have a word with our mystery canoeist. I’d very much like to have a word with him.’

The drive back into Upham was a quiet one; for different reasons, everyone in the car needed time to reflect on the afternoon’s events. As Melanie Carter walked away towards her front door, Smith could see that Steven Neale was hanging back as if he had something more to say. Smith said nothing, allowing whatever it was to form **of its own accord**.

> [of your own accord](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/of-own-accord): If you do something of your own accord, you do it without being asked to do it

‘I just wanted to say that… I’m sorry.’

‘What for?’

‘When we got there this afternoon. I was rude. I know I shouted.’

‘Forget it. Perfectly understandable. One thing, though.’

‘Yes?’

‘One way or another you’re getting it out of your system, which is good, because if you don’t it’ll do you more harm in the long run. I don’t know about her, though.’

He nodded towards the girl, who was waiting at the door, out of hearing but watching them. ‘You’ve got a little diamond there. You want to take good care of her over the next few weeks.’

‘Right. How did…?’

‘We call it “**reading between the lines**.’’

> [read between the lines](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/read-between-the-lines): to try to understand someone's real feelings or intentions from what they say or write

‘OK.’

‘It’s all in a day’s work. Modern policing and all that. Thanks again, Steven.’

Even after they had dropped off the two witnesses, there wasn’t much conversation in the car. They were on the **outskirts** of Kings Lake and slowing down into the afternoon traffic before Smith glanced across and said to Waters, ‘Alright?’

> [the outskirts](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/outskirts): the areas that form the edge of a town or city

Waters looked back, blinking a little as if he had been daydreaming, and nodded.

‘As long as you’re not thinking of giving it all up after a trip out with me – I don’t need that on my conscience. If you’ve made a bad career choice, can you save the announcement for some time next week rather than this?’

‘Just thinking about those two and Wayne Fletcher. All the time I was at school, nobody actually died.’

‘I think that’s what we call a good thing, isn’t it?’

Waters didn’t reply.

‘Do a lot of thinking, do you? I mean it comes in handy in this job but you can overdo it.’

And then, as the words formed, as they found their way to the front of his mouth and tumbled out, the sensation of a switch clicking on somewhere in his head and a blinding flash – ‘**Still waters run deep**, I suppose.’

> [still waters run deep](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/still-waters-run-deep): said about a person who says little, but who might in fact know a lot

They were waiting at a set of lights. He looked across again and saw the smile, a little weary smile at a joke that had been made since the younger man was at the school where nobody actually died. But that wasn’t it. Something in the profile maybe, or the set of the mouth – Smith couldn’t be sure what had made him realize at last, but neither was he in any doubt.

‘I used to say that to a DS, years ago. His name was-’

‘Waters. I know.’

‘Bloody hell! You’re Dougie Waters’ boy!’

‘I know. The lights have changed.’

Smith pulled the car out into the junction, not taking his eyes off the road but still shaking his head.

‘Why didn’t you say something? Dougie Waters!’

‘Well, you being a detective, I thought…’

‘Yes, alright, point taken, I suppose. But you could have said something.’

‘I didn’t want it to seem as if I was, well, trying to take advantage. I don’t think everyone needs to know my dad was in the force.’

At least this explained how the request had been made to DI Reeve before they had even met. They were at the next set of lights. Waters looked a little uncomfortable, as if even admitting who he was might be perceived by Smith as using his family connection in some way.

‘Listen. Your dad was a good sort, and a bloody good copper. He **covered my backside** more than once, I can tell you. What’s he up to now?’

> [cover your backside/behind/rear](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/cover-backside-behind-rear?q=cover+your+backside): to do something to protect yourself from blame or criticism in the future

‘He works for himself – well, he runs his own business.’

‘Very nice. What line of work?’

‘The same.’

The station was ahead of them now, and Smith didn’t speak again until they had pulled into the car park.

‘What do you mean? An agency, private detectives?’

Waters nodded.

‘Well, that’s unusual these days. Most end up in security, if they want to keep working at all. Does he get plenty to keep him busy? Not all divorces, I hope!’

‘No, not much of that. He’s in the office, mostly. That keeps him busy.’

‘He’s got a couple of ex-jobbers working for him, then?’

‘About ten, I think.’

‘Ten? That’s not an agency, it’s more like a rival force! I know what those people charge – he must be doing very nicely. Good for him. Well done, Dougie!’

In the short silence after that, Smith was back there again, in the saloon bar of the… Where was it, The Blue Boar? The **saloon** bar, just the two of them, Dougie apologizing over and over, and himself saying it didn’t matter, if that’s how Dougie really felt, then it was the best thing. As long as he was certain… Maybe if he took a month off, he might feel differently, but knowing that he wouldn’t because in the man’s eyes, behind the man’s eyes, he could see the damage that the case had done. Dougie Waters had **toughed it out** whilst others had quietly found ways not to **confront** the horror of it any more, had had words behind closed doors and got themselves **redeployed** onto other business. Yes, Dougie had toughed it out, and he was there when they made the arrest. Unbearable, the tension of it that afternoon, and when Andretti had twisted away and made a break for the window, any of them would have done the same, knocked him down, punched him again, and again to make sure because that monster must never be allowed to walk down a street with decent people again… And because Dougie had two young daughters.

> [saloon](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/saloon): a public bar, especially in the past in the western US
>
> [tough something out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/tough-out?q=toughed+it+out): to deal with a difficult period or situation without becoming any less certain or determined in your plans or opinions
>
> [confront](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/confront): to face, meet, or deal with a difficult situation or person
>
> [redeploy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/redeploy?q=redeployed): to move employees, soldiers, equipment, etc. to a different place or use them in a more effective way

‘So he’s alright then, your dad?’

That the boy knew something of the story was certain, but Smith could not judge just how much – it was better to **err on the side of caution**.

> [err on the side of caution](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/err-on-the-side-of-caution?q=on+the+side+of+caution): to be especially careful rather than taking a risk or making a mistake

‘Yes, he’s good. Obviously he tried to **put me off**… But he’s also supported me when he saw that wasn’t going to work. Since I got this posting to Kings Lake, he’s talked a bit about the old days. A bit about you.’

> [put someone off](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/put-off?q=put+me+off): to tell someone that you cannot see them or do something for them, or to stop someone from doing something, until a later time

‘Your mum, how is she? Sorry, I’ve forgotten, but we never really…’

‘Yes, she’s fine. Retired, thanks to dad’s business.’

‘And your sisters? There were two, I remember.’

‘All doing well. I’m three times an uncle!’

‘Ha, at your age!’

‘He asked me to say… Well, just to be remembered to you.’

‘Remembered? You tell him that I’ve never forgotten it, the time we worked together. Him and John Streeter and Eddie Hart… The four musketeers. I expect you’ll have to Google that as well. I was D’Artagnon, the good-looking one. You give your dad my best regards.’

There was more, something in Waters’ face that was unsaid, perhaps a question unasked but it could wait. **Uncovering** the past was like uncovering some **archeological** remains, best done slowly, with a fine brush, time’s work being so fragile. And the day wasn’t over, there were still two or three hours before they could claim a full day’s pay.

> [uncover](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/uncover?q=Uncovering): to discover something secret or hidden
>
> [archaeological](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/archaeological?q=archeological): involving or relating to archaeology
>
> [archaeology](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/archaeology): the study of the buildings, graves, tools, and other objects that belonged to people who lived in the past, in order to learn about their culture and society

He sent Waters into the office with a list of things to do. Where could canoes be hired between Kings Lake and Upham? Had anyone reported a canoe being stolen at around the right time – or, come to that, one being found? Did any riverside pubs have CCTV overlooking the river, and if so, had any of them actually been switched on last weekend? Smith knew some of the answers already but it was all good baby steps for a young detective about to make his way in the world.

Bloody hell – he’s Dougie Waters’ boy…

Instead of phoning each canoe shop and marina listed on the screen directly from there, Waters wrote the names and numbers into his notebook first – that way he would have a record of each one that had been contacted. After the brief conversation with the first entry – in which he learned the difference between **chandlery** and boat hire – an officer that he had not yet met appeared as if from nowhere beside his desk. The man was thick-set and powerfully built, and his being a little below average height emphasized the fact. The hair was intensely dark, and though he was clean-shaven the jowls and chin showed where a beard would appear the moment he put his razor away. He pushed out a hand and Waters half-stood as he took it; the eyes smiled but the grip was little short of an attempt to intimidate the younger man before he could gain the advantage of his height.

> [chandlery](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/chandlery): a shop or business selling supplies for boats or ships

‘Good to meet you. Chris, isn’t it? What are you working on?’

Waters explained, aware that he did not yet know the other detective’s name. As he talked, he saw the eyes roam over the screen, over the open notebook, and then over his own face.

‘Well, I thought that one was dead and buried – not literally but you know what I mean! What’s DC found then?’

Something told Waters not to **elaborate**. He played the office boy, the carrier-out of meaningless chores, and watched the other man’s expression closely.

> [elaborate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/elaborate): containing a lot of careful detail or many detailed parts

‘We all have to begin somewhere, don’t we? I expect he’s just giving you something to practise on. No doubt he’s off on something else already, just left you to make some lists.’

The comment was well-judged, just **demeaning** enough to slip through Waters’ guard:

> [demeaning](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/demeaning): causing someone to become or feel less respected

‘No, he’s following up on the canoeist.’

‘Right. Where?’

‘He’s gone out to Oldmills Lock, wherever that is.’

‘And what’s he after out there, I wonder?’

Waters sensed that he had said more than intended already, and shrugged.

‘Nice to meet you, Waters. Look forward to working with you some time. It isn’t always this boring!’

He was already walking away, the smile on his face impossible to read.

‘Sorry, I didn’t get your name.’

‘No, that’s right, you didn’t. John – John Wilson.’