### Chapter Seven

They were halfway across the yard when Smith stopped. Waters carried on a few more steps and then turned and waited for an explanation. He followed the pointing finger up to the sign that read ‘Pisces Marina – chandlery and boat-hire’.

‘Get a picture of that, will you? I expect you’ve got a fancy camera on your phone – mine’s run out of flash bulbs.’

Waters did as he was asked.

‘Any particular reason? I’ve got the details in my book if we need them.’

‘Just another one of those funny little coincidences that I don’t find very amusing. We’ll have another session later, put it all together then and see what we’ve got. Come on, let’s find this Mr Riches.’

The receptionist fluttered a little as Chris Waters explained who they were, fluttered and blushed and smiled before going to find her employer in the offices behind the front desk. When he caught the young detective’s eye, Smith raised his eyebrows, grinned and nodded towards the girl; Waters frowned, as if he had missed something significant in the investigation and Smith’s nodding became instead a slow shake of the head.

On her return, the girl was followed by a short, fat, balding and red-faced man, his pink shirt already damp under the arms although it was not yet nine o’clock in the morning.

‘Good morning, gentlemen. I have to say, we go from one extreme to the other. The last time we had a canoe stolen, I got a PCSO and a letter advising me how to avoid becoming a victim of crime. Now I get the **flying squad**. Which one of you is senior?’

> [flying squad](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/flying-squad): a small group of police officers that is trained to act quickly, especially when there is a serious crime

Smith held the man’s stare, nothing more, and it was Waters who eventually pointed to his colleague in answer.

‘Right, come on through.’

Timothy Riches’ office had ‘MD’ in gold lettering on the door and too much executive-style furniture for the space available. He sat down in the high-backed swivel chair and waved the two policemen into the lower chairs in front of his desk. Leaning forward then, his finger over the intercom button, he asked if they wanted coffee. Both declined and the MD shrugged and sat back in the chair that was just a little too large for him.

‘I don’t suppose you checked your records but this is the fourth canoe stolen this year. It’s about time you took some notice. After all, we pay-’

‘Your rates and taxes, which pay our wages. Yes, quite right, sir, and if this matter is not quickly resolved to your satisfaction, I think you should write to your MP.’

Riches looked from Smith to Waters and back again.

‘As it happens, Assistant Chief Constable Devine is following this case, he has taken a personal interest in it, which is why he has dispatched us here so early this morning.’

Riches was nodding, his mouth slightly open.

‘It may be, sir, that a serial canoe thief is operating in the area.’

‘I see, er, sergeant. Quite right. I – you have some questions?’

‘Just a few, sir. Obviously, we need to get out and in **pursuit** as quickly as possible. We need to see your records for canoes hired last Saturday.’

> [pursuit](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/pursuit): the act of following someone or something to try to catch him, her, or it

Riches pressed the **intercom** button. Somewhere it gave a half-hearted buzz and then resigned itself to an **intermittent** crackle. Riches looked up at them, pressed it again with even less success and finally called out ‘Clare!’

> [intercom](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/intercom): a device that people speak into when they want to communicate with someone who is inside a building, in a different room, in part of a plane, etc.
>
> [intermittent](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/intermittent): not happening regularly or continuously; stopping and starting repeatedly or with periods in between

They waited, Smith smiling, Riches sweating and Waters practising his upside down reading so that he could avoid laughing out loud.

‘Clare!’

The receptionist appeared in the doorway.

‘I need the boat hire records for the weekend.’

She came into the room, walked behind Riches’ desk and began to type on the computer keyboard. Riches explained – ‘It’s a new system. I don’t have the time to get to know all the **day-to-day** stuff…’

> [day-to-day](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/day-to-day): happening every day as a regular part of your job or life

Clare straightened up, tall, slender, darkly pretty, and glanced again at Waters. Riches turned the screen towards them.

Waters read it and said to the girl, ‘Those are cruisers. Could we have canoes?’

Riches tutted and said to Smith, ‘Can’t get the staff these days.’

‘I know, sir. We have the same problem with youngsters. They seem to have no psychic powers at all. I don’t know what the schools are teaching them.’

The second screen was the one that they needed and Clare left the room, after being told to get Barry to fix the intercom again. Without being asked, Waters was up and close to it, making notes. As he did so, Smith could finally start work.

‘Obviously, you take a **deposit** for these boats. How much was it?’

> [deposit](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/deposit): to pay someone an amount of money when you agree to pay for or buy something, either as part of the total payment, or as an amount that will be returned to you later, if you keep the agreed arrangement

‘For that type of canoe, fifty pounds.’

‘Fifty?’

‘That’s the point, sergeant. It was one of our wooden canoes, proper Canadian-style. Several hundred pounds to replace, if you can find one. If I claim on the insurance-’

‘Yes, I see, much more of this and you could be facing bankruptcy. What name did he use, DC Waters?’

‘Jones, sir.’

‘Oh, right. Makes a change from Smith, I suppose.’

Riches’ small mouth had fallen open a little again.

‘You mean that he-’

‘Undoubtedly, sir. A **hardened** criminal. Do the times match up, more or less, DC Waters?’

> [hardened](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hardened): no longer likely to change a bad way of life or feel sorry about it

‘Yes, I’d say so, **sarge**.’

> [sarge](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/sarge): informal for sergeant 

Smith had to suppress a smile of his own then, at how quickly Waters had slipped into role.

‘Right, we need to speak to whoever actually did this bit of hiring out, Mr Riches.’

Riches pulled the screen back round, peered at it and said, ‘Ah, that was Barry.’

Barry wiped his hands on his overalls as if he was expecting to shake hands. Smith looked **pointedly** at Riches but the latter failed to understand until he heard the words, ‘Thank you for your assistance this morning, sir. We can take it from here.’

> [pointedly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/pointedly): in an obvious and intentional way

When the managing director had left the workshop, Smith took out his cigarettes and offered one to the nervous-looking mechanic-come-electrician-come-dogsbody.

‘You’re not in any bother, son. We just need some info on a customer here last weekend.’

Barry remembered him. It was the name, it just didn’t go with the foreign accent. And five brand new ten pound notes like they’d just come off the **printing press**; at that Smith told Waters to **nip** back in and speak to Clare – do they do routine checks on all notes? No, said Barry, in answer to the next question, there were no bags or rucksacks around when he pushed the canoe and its occupant off from the platform. Seven o’clock when he, Barry, had left, he’d stayed on a little just in case the bloke was running late but he never showed up. Barry had phoned Mr Riches and left a message, you had to, just to cover yourself.

> [printing press](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/printing-press): a machine that prints books, newspapers, or magazines
>
> [nip](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/nip?q=nip+): to go somewhere quickly or be somewhere for only a short time

Waters reappeared, shaking his head. They didn’t check them here but the cash was banked on the Monday and they would have heard by now if any of the notes were forgeries. Finally, Smith asked to see another of the Canadian-style canoes. Barry took them into the boathouse next door and pointed to one on the rack, in for repair.

‘Can you lift it down from there, Chris?’

He could, but only just - it took two hands and some straining muscles.

‘What about paddles, Barry?’

‘You only need one if you’re going solo in one of these.’

He fetched a long, streamlined wooden paddle from the other end of the boathouse.

‘Beautiful jobs, these were. Specially made when the place first opened. The old bloke who made these is dead now…’

Smith examined it, admiring the curve from the **shaft** into the blade and the rich grain in the wood. He even made a couple of pulls with it before he ran his thumb over the top of the handle, felt something and turned the paddle to look more closely. There was a moment of silence.

> [shaft](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/shaft): a pole or rod that forms the handle of a tool or weapon

‘What’s this?’

Barry looked and nodded.

‘Like I said, a few of these were done specially when the place opened.’

Smith held out the paddle, handle-first, towards Waters.

‘Another picture, please. Get several, different angles.’

Barry couldn’t make it out, thought that he hadn’t explained it properly.

‘It’s just the name, isn’t it. The old bloke carved them. You know, **Pisces** – the sign of the fish.’

> [Pisces](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/pisces?q=Pisces): a large constellation (= a group of stars) said to look like two fish

Now the office was busy, with every desk occupied, keyboards chattering and a couple of telephone conversations already underway. Smith glanced around and pulled a face.

‘How anyone imagined that open-plan offices would be more efficient is beyond me.’

Waters shrugged and waited, notebook open and at the ready.

‘So use one of the interview rooms, they’ve got direct lines, and they should be free as everyone’s in here rather than interviewing any actual criminals. Get that contact of yours at the school and ask about Wayne’s swimming abilities. I suppose they might need to get hold of a PE teacher but I’m pretty sure that Upham has a pool. If he swam like a tortoise, we could be wasting our time here.’

‘OK. What happens then?’

‘I’m seeing DI Reeve after lunch. She decides.’

‘Just like that? One officer?’

‘In the end, it always comes down to someone’s decision. But the better our **spadework**, the more chance that we can win a bit more time on it. Off you go.’

> [spadework](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/spadework): hard, sometimes boring work done in preparation for something

Smith had only recently discovered how to rename folders on the computer. He spent a minute or two wondering what to call this one before typing in ‘Accidental Death?’ Then, one by one, he began dragging the photographs and video files into it, along with a summary of what he and Waters had established so far. If there was time, he would get Waters to scan in the witness statements as well – he was sure to know how to do that.

When he sensed the figure standing behind him, Smith’s fingers stopped. He looked at the screen top left where the silhouette was outlined against a window behind it.

‘Seems like a nice lad, Waters. Bit of a pup but pleasant enough. He seemed to think you were getting him to make lists so that he could make more lists, though.’

‘Yes, that’s how some people see paperwork, as a chore. Pity that QCs don’t see it the same way.’

He turned to face Wilson as he spoke. One or two faces in the room were watching.

‘I see you’re still scratching around with that.’

Wilson indicated the screen.

‘As I was asked. It’s been left somewhat untidy.’

The fixed half-smile on Wilson’s face **wavered** for a moment.

> [waver](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/waver?q=wavered): to lose strength, determination, or purpose, especially temporarily

‘Charlie was the duty officer.’

‘Yes, and he did exactly what he should, apart from leaving a bit of tape on a fence. He contacted CID. You were on CID call all of Sunday.’

‘So?’

‘So you sent O’Leary, a DC.’

‘And? It was an obvious accidental, nothing he couldn’t handle.’

Smith half turned the swivel chair back towards the screen and frowned.

‘It’s not obvious to me.’

‘You’ve got to be **having a laugh**! He was pissed and drugged up, and then he went swimming in a river full of motor cruisers!’

> [**you're having a laugh**](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/you-re-having-a-laugh?q=having+a+laugh): used to show that you think that what someone has just said is not reasonable or fair

More heads had turned as Wilson’s voice grew louder.

Smith turned again to face him.

‘I think it’s worth another look. But you don’t have to worry, Wilson. If anything interesting does turn up, you can read about it in the newspapers.’

The contempt on the heavily-jowelled face became fury, just for an instant before Wilson twisted away, and crossed the office, laughing aloud and shaking his head. Smith watched him go and then saw Maggie Henderson smiling and wagging her finger at him.

Ten minutes later, Waters returned. Smith was already learning to read his body language – the long stride and intent look meant that they had another result.

‘He set the school’s 100 metre freestyle record when he was fourteen. It still stands.’

Smith thought long and hard before telling Waters about the bruising on the body; it was a risk of sorts, though the boy did seem trustworthy, and if DI Reeve then decided to leave it alone, as she might, Waters would not find that easy to accept or even understand. After he had told him, and showed him Olive Markham’s handiwork with the pathology lab’s camera, the result was not quite what Smith had anticipated. Waters fell silent, sat back and looked away for several seconds.

‘What’s up?’

The look on Waters’ face as he spoke could only be described as worried.

‘To be honest, DC, I thought we were – that you were just sort of playing along with it because of me. That it wasn’t a real case?’

‘You thought that this was some sort of practice? It’s pretty real for the family and friends, never mind Wayne Fletcher. I don’t think he’s practising being dead.’

‘I’m sorry, I wasn’t being **callous**, I can see all that. But I didn’t think that someone had actually – killed him. I thought we were just looking at possibilities.’

> [callous](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/callous): unkind, cruel, and without sympathy or feeling for other people

‘We are. But as we start to gather information – and that’s all it is so far, not evidence – the possibilities start to become probabilities.’

Waters was silent again. Smith closed the screen before any other interested parties wandered by, and waited.

‘To me, that bruise makes it more than a probability, DC. How else could it have got there on the head? If we measure the **embossing** on the paddle and the bruise in the photo – software can do that – and they match up, it means he was hit with the paddle. I don’t see how that was ever accidental, and if it was intentional then it was… Murder.’

> [emboss](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/emboss?q=embossing): to decorate an object, especially with letters, using special tools that make a raised mark on its surface

Smith held out his hand and patted the air with it – Waters nodded and spoke more quietly.

‘But it was, wasn’t it?’

‘The first problem is, the blow doesn’t come up as the cause of death. It’s indirect. If I deliberately push you off a ten-storey building and you die as a result – not that you’d have much choice in the matter – the cause and effect are directly linked: I murdered you. But if I give you a shove in here, you catch yourself on the corner of the desk as a result and die of internal bleeding three days later, no-one is going to make a murder charge stick, are they?’

‘Manslaughter?’

‘A better bet, especially if someone can show that I meant to do you some harm, that it wasn’t just a friendly push.’

‘Hitting someone in the water with a paddle isn’t ever going to be friendly, is it?’

‘I can think of better ways of showing affection. Of course, we don’t know that Wayne was in the water when he got hit, do we? See, you’ve got to look at it from all ways. Another thing – why turn the paddle around and use the handle as a weapon? If you wanted to really hurt someone with that paddle, you’d swing it like a club, not poke them with the end of it.’

Waters breathed out through pursed lips.

‘But it’s real case, isn’t it? Whatever happened, it wasn’t a simple accident.’

Smith gathered the papers into the manila folder and locked them in his desk drawer.

‘You discovered the delights of our canteen yet?’

Waters looked at his watch.

‘It isn’t lunchtime for another half hour, is it?’

‘It is if we have to start at the crack of dawn.’

‘Sorry, DC. Is there anything else I can do with this, to help?’

Smith stood up, ready to leave.

‘Don’t know. Can you think of a reason to ring Pisces again? I reckon you missed a trick there. That Clare was a lovely girl.’

‘So I need to read this, don’t I?’

‘Yes.’

Smith stood up and walked to the window, standing with his feet a little apart, one hand holding the opposite wrist behind his back as if he had been told to stand easy on parade. DI Reeve began to work through the papers and images, noting that they were all clipped together in logical groups, and all the groups were in an equally logical sequence. She glanced up at the straight back, the clean but well-worn jacket, the sensible trousers and shoes, and she wondered about his life now that he was alone. As far as she knew he was still alone – it was hard to imagine him with another woman after Sheila. The two of them were difficult to think of separately once you had spent an evening in their company, and Reeve had spent several of those. Odd that they never had children… Reeve had never asked but she had assumed there was some medical reason for it. They would have made wonderful parents. And then she thought briefly about her own life, wondering why she had never found that person. But then, if you did, you would have to go through the pain of either losing them or leaving them, just as Smith had done.

There was a **haze** over the sea, beyond the lines of cranes at the docks; the weather was holding but only just. It mattered because if DI Reeve read the file in the same way that he did, then she would not be able to ignore what it contained – she would ask him what he proposed to do and he would say that they needed to make some effort to find the canoeist. As there was no evidence that he had ever come back down the river, he might still be up there. It was unlikely, very unlikely, but, logically, they had to go and have a look. Wandering up and down **towpaths** would be a lot less pleasant in the rain.

> [haze](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/haze): something such as heat or smoke in the air that makes it less clear, so that it is difficult to see well
>
> [towpath](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/towpath?q=towpaths): a path that goes along the side of a river or canal, used in the past by horses pulling boats

Smith looked around. She was still reading intently and quickly, fingers ready to turn the page before her eyes had finished with it. Alison Reeve was probably the best female detective that had served under him, and now she was an effective DI. Another couple of years avoiding calamities and spending cuts, and she would make DCI, too.

She closed the file and Smith went back to his seat.

‘Bloody hell, DC.’

‘Yes, it’s one of those.’

She opened it at the beginning again.

‘First thing. Procedurally, how was it handled at the start? Is it OK? For God’s sake tell me it’s OK. You know why.’

‘Not going out on the Saturday evening was reasonable, I suppose, in view of the ages of those concerned. Teenagers are **congenitally** **irresponsible**, and wander off. If it had been a girl… Anyway, Charlie Hills did everything right on the Sunday morning as duty officer. He called CID the moment they found the boy.’

> [congenital](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/congenital): used to say that someone always shows a particular bad quality
>
> [irresponsible](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/irresponsible): not thinking enough or not worrying about the possible results of what you do

‘Wilson?’

Smith nodded and saw the tiny shake of the head as Reeve looked down at the file again.

‘You know what I’m going to say next, don’t you, DC?’

‘That Wilson should have gone himself. He sent O’Leary instead. It matters because it gives a message if you send the most junior detective to a body, it’s like saying, yes, routine accidental drowning, we’re just going through the motions. It affects how everyone views it after that.’

‘But it’s just a **judgement-call**, that. Nothing disciplinary in it.’

> [judgment call](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/judgment-call): a decision someone has to make using their own ideas and opinions

‘No. Ma’am.’

She looked up again, half annoyed with him because that was his way of saying to her, you have your management hat on when you say things like that. Smith shrugged a half-apology, his point made. Reeve went back to the file, turning pages quickly, skimming and giving herself time to think.

‘We can release the body?’

‘Yes. Wayne cannot tell us anything else, sadly.’

She picked up a pencil and tapped the point quietly on the desk several times.

‘What do you want to do?’

‘We’d better go and have a look for the mystery man. If he’s paddling back to wherever he came from, he’s come to a dead end by now, or lugging the canoe overland. Too many days have gone by but it’s a box we need to tick. He’s not going to give himself up, is he?’

‘You mean because of the CPR?’

‘Yes – he knew what he’d done, assuming that’s what happened.’

‘And what do you need?’

‘A couple of bodies to speed things up. Four of us can get it done in a day.’

‘How about Wilson and O’Leary?’

‘How about Murray and Henderson?’

She nodded and gave him her sweetest smile as she said, ‘And DC?’

‘Yes?’

‘Don’t find anything.’