## Packet Analysis and Network Basics

### Packet Analysis and Packet Sniffers

**Packet analysis**, often referred to as packet sniffing or protocol analysis, describes the process of capturing and interpreting live data as it flows across a network in order to better understand what is happening on that network. Packet analysis is typically performed by a **packet sniffer**, a tool used to capture raw network data going across the wire. 

Packet analysis can help with the following: 

- Understanding network characteristics 
- Learning who is on a network 
- Determining who or what is utilizing available bandwidth 
- Identifying peak network usage times 
- Identifying malicious activity 
- Finding unsecured and bloated applications

There are various types of packet-sniffing programs, including both free and commercial ones. Each program is designed with different goals in mind. A few popular packet analysis programs are **tcpdump**, **OmniPeek**, and **Wireshark** (we’ll primarily be using **Wireshark** in this book). **OmniPeek** and **Wireshark** have graphical user interfaces (GUIs), while **tcpdump** is a command line program.

### How Computers Communicate

#### Network Hardware

##### Hubs

Because hubs can generate a lot of unnecessary network traffic and are capable of operating only in **half-duplex mode** (they cannot send and receive data at the same time), you won’t typically see them used in most modern or high-density networks; switches are used instead.

A hub is no more than a repeating device that operates on the physical layer of the OSI model. It takes packets sent from one port and transmits (repeats) them to every other port on the device, and it’s up to the receiving device to accept or reject each packet. For example, if a computer on port 1 of a 4-port hub needs to send data to a computer on port 2, the hub sends those packets to ports 2, 3, and 4. The clients connected to ports 3 and 4 examine the destination Media Access Control (MAC) address field in the Ethernet header of the packet and see that the packet is not for them, so they drop (discard) the packet.

The best alternatives to hubs in production and high-density networks are switches, which are full-duplex devices that can send and receive data synchronously.

##### Switches

Like a hub, a switch is designed to repeat packets. However, unlike a hub, rather than broadcasting data to every port, a switch sends data to only the computer for which the data is intended.

Several larger switches on the market, such as Cisco-branded ones, are managed via specialized, vendor-specific software or web interfaces. These switches are commonly referred to as managed switches. Managed switches provide several features that can be useful in network management, including the ability to enable or disable specific ports, view port statistics, make configuration changes, and remotely reboot.

Switches also offer advanced functionality for handling transmitted packets. To be able to communicate directly with specific devices, switches must be able to uniquely identify devices based on their MAC addresses, which means that they must operate on the data link layer of the OSI model.

Switches store the layer 2 address of every connected device in a CAM table, which acts as a kind of traffic cop. When a packet is transmitted, the switch reads the layer 2 header information in the packet and, using the CAM table as reference, determines to which port(s) to send the packet.  Switches send packets only to specific ports, thus greatly reducing network traffic.

##### Routers

Routers operate at layer 3 of the OSI model, where they are responsible for forwarding packets between two or more networks. The process used by routers to direct the flow of traffic among networks is called routing.

### Traffic Classifications

Network traffic can be classified as one of three types: broadcast, multicast, and unicast. Each classification has a distinct characteristic that determines how packets in that class are handled by networking hardware.

#### Broadcast Traffic

A broadcast packet is a packet that’s sent to all ports on a network segment, regardless of whether a given port is a hub or switch. 

There are layer 2 and layer 3 forms of broadcast traffic. On layer 2, the MAC address ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff is the reserved broadcast address, and any traffic sent to this address is broadcast to the entire network segment. Layer 3 also has a specific broadcast address, but it varies based on the network address range in use.

The highest possible IP address in an IP network range is reserved for use as the broadcast address. For example, if your computer has an address of 192.168.0.20 and a 255.255.255.0 subnet mask, then 192.168.0.255 is the broadcast address.

The extent to which broadcast packets can travel is called the broadcast domain, which is the network segment where any computer can directly transmit to another computer without going through a router.

#### Multicast Traffic

Multicast is a means of transmitting a packet from a single source to multiple destinations simultaneously. The goal of multicasting is to use as little bandwidth as possible. The optimization of this traffic lies in that a stream of data is replicated fewer times along its path to its destination. The exact handling of multicast traffic is highly dependent on its implementation in individual protocols. 

The primary method of implementing multicast traffic is via an addressing scheme that joins the packet recipients to a multicast group. This is how IP multicast works. This addressing scheme ensures that the packets cannot be transmitted to computers to which the packets are not destined. In fact, IP devotes an entire range of addresses to multicast. If you see an IP address in the 224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255 range, it is most likely handling multicast traffic because these ranges are reserved for that purpose.

#### Unicast Traffic

A unicast packet is transmitted from one computer directly to another. The details of how unicast functions are dependent on the protocol using it. For example, consider a device that wishes to communicate with a web server. This is a one-to-one connection, so this communication process would begin with the client device transmitting a packet to only the web server.