## The Virtual DOM

As web applications become more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult to manage the “real DOM,” which is a complex and error-prone process. React’s virtual DOM provides a solution to this problem.

### An Intro to the Virtual DOM

The DOM itself is the browser runtime’s model of the document. The virtual DOM is a lightweight copy of this, with the key difference that while the real DOM is made up of Node objects, the virtual DOM is made up of plain JS objects that act as descriptions. It allows web developers to create user interfaces in a more efficient and performant way.

In React, whenever we tell it to make a change to the UI via `setState` or some other mechanism, the virtual DOM is updated first, and then the real DOM is updated to match the changes in the virtual DOM. This process is called **reconciliation**.

The reason for updating the virtual DOM first is that updates to the real DOM can be somewhat slow and expensive. We’ll cover this in the next section, but the gist of it is that every time a change is made to the real DOM, the browser has to recalculate the layout of the page, repaint the screen, and perform other operations that can be time-consuming.

For example, just reading an element’s offsetWidth can trigger a reflow, which is a process where the browser recalculates the layout of all or part of the document, potentially affecting performance and making direct DOM interactions less efficient:

```js
const btn = document.getElementById("myButton"); 
const width = btn.offsetWidth; // This can trigger a reflow
```

On the other hand, updating the virtual DOM is much faster because it doesn’t involve any changes to the actual page layout. Instead, it is a simple JavaScript object that can be manipulated quickly and efficiently through various algorithmic approaches that can make the best use of the JavaScript engine available and increase its efficiency over time, decoupled from the browsers and other host environments.

When updates are made to the virtual DOM, React uses a diffing algorithm to iden‐tify the differences between the old and new versions of the virtual DOM. This algo‐rithm then determines the minimal set of changes required to update the real DOM, and these changes are applied in a batched and optimized way to minimize the per‐formance impact.

### The Real DOM

When an HTML page is loaded into a web browser, it is parsed and converted into a tree of nodes and objects—an object model—which is the DOM: just a big JavaScript object. The DOM is a live representation of the web page, meaning that it is constantly being updated as users interact with the page.

```js
// Retrieve the <h1> node 
const h1Node = document.querySelector(".heading"); 

// Modify its contents 
if (h1Node) {  
  h1Node.innerHTML = "Updated Heading!"; 
}

console.log(h1Node);
```

There’s a bit of a danger here, because while the `document.querySelector` method is a powerful tool for selecting elements in the real DOM based on CSS selectors, one potential performance issue with this method is that it can be slow when working with large and complex documents. The method has to start at the top of the document and traverse downward to find the desired element, which can be a time-consuming process.

When we call `document.querySelector()` with a CSS selector, the browser has to search the entire document tree for matching elements. This means that the search can be slow, especially if the document is large and has a complex structure. In addi‐tion, the browser has to evaluate the selector itself, which can be a complex process, depending on the complexity of the selector.

In contrast, `document.getElementById` does not require validation like CSS selectors, and has increased specificity since `id` attributes are expected to be unique, so it is generally more efficient.

We say the DOM is volatile because it is affected by so many things, including user interactions, network requests, client-side scripts, and other events that can cause it to change at any time. React, through the virtual DOM, protects us from this environment using the virtual DOM.

#### Pitfalls of the Real DOM

The real DOM has several pitfalls that can make it difficult to build a highperformance web application. Some of these pitfalls include performance issues, cross-browser compatibility, and security vulnerabilities, where manipulating the DOM directly could present cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities.

##### Performance

One of the biggest issues with the real DOM is its performance. Whenever a change is made to the DOM, such as adding or removing an element, or changing the text or attributes of an element, the browser has to recalculate the layout and repaint the affected parts of the page. This can be a slow and resource-intensive process, espe‐cially for large and complex web pages.

As mentioned earlier, reading a DOM element’s `offsetWidth` property may seem like a simple operation, but it can actually trigger a costly recalculation of the layout by the browser. This is because `offsetWidth` is a computed property that depends on the layout of the element and its ancestors, which means that the browser needs to ensure that the layout information is up-to-date before it can return an accurate value.

In the worst-case scenario, reading an element’s `offsetWidth` property with Big O notation would be estimated as (O(n)). This is because accessing this property can potentially trigger a reflow in the browser, which involves recalculating layout positions for a number of elements on the page. In this context, (n) represents the number of DOM elements affected by the reflow. Even though the direct property access is quick, the associated side effects, like a reflow, can make the operation scale with the number of elements on the page.

If you’re looking to avoid the potential reflow triggered by accessing layout properties like `offsetWidth`, we can employ certain techniques to make the operation more permanent. Here’s one approach using the `getBoundingClientRect()` method, which can batch layout reads and writes: 

```js
// Accessing layout properties in a more performant way 
function getOffsetWidthWithoutTriggeringReflow(element) {  
  let width;  
  
  // Batch all reading operations  
  const rect = element.getBoundingClientRect(); 
  width = rect.width;  
  
  // ... any other reading operations  
  
  // Followed by writing operations, if any 
  
  return width; 
}

const element = document.querySelector(".myElement"); 
const width = getOffsetWidthWithoutTriggeringReflow(element); 
console.log(width);
```

By using `getBoundingClientRect()`, we retrieve multiple layout properties in a single call, reducing the chances of triggering multiple reflows. Additionally, by batching reading and writing operations separately, we can further minimize **layout thrashing**, which is the repeated and unnecessary recalculations of layout caused by frequent interleaved reading and writing of layout properties.

However, even `getBoundingClientRect()` can cause a reflow if there are pending lay‐out changes. The key to performance here is to minimize the number of times you force the browser to recalculate layout, and when you do, try to retrieve as much information as you need in one go.

React handles all of this for us out of the box using the virtual DOM as an intermediate layer between real DOM operations.

### How the Virtual DOM Works

#### React Elements

Here is an example of a React element:

```js
const element = React.createElement(  
  "div", 
  { className: "my-class" }, 
  "Hello, world!" 
);
```

We can see the actual created element if we use `console.log(element)`. It looks like this:

```js
{  
  $$typeof: Symbol(react.element), 
  type: "div",  
  key: null,  
  ref: null,  
  props: {   
    className: "my-class", 
    children: "Hello, world!"  
  },  
  _owner: null,  
  _store: {} 
}
```

This is a representation of a React element. React elements are the smallest building blocks of a React application, and they describe what should appear on the screen. Each element is a plain JavaScript object that describes the component it represents, along with any relevant props or attributes.

`$$typeof` 

- This is a symbol used by React to ensure that an object is a valid React element. In this case, it is `Symbol(react.element)`.  `$$typeof` can have other values, depending on the type of the element: `Symbol(react.fragment)`,  `Symbol(react.portal)` , `Symbol(react.profiler)`, `Symbol(react.provider)`. 

  In general, `$$typeof` serves as a type marker that identifies the type of the React element.

`type`

- This property represents the type of the component that the element represents. In this case, it is "div", indicating that this is a `<div>` DOM element, called a “host component.” The type property of a React element can be either a string or a function (or a class, but we don’t talk about that because it’s being phased out). If it is a string, it represents the HTML tag name, like "`div`", "`span`", "`button`", etc. When it is a function, it represents a custom React component, which is essentially just a JavaScript function that returns JSX.

`ref`

- This property lets the parent component request a reference to the underlying DOM node. It is generally used in cases where direct manipulation of the DOM is necessary. In this case, the `ref` is `null`.

`props`

- This property is an object that contains all of the attributes and props that were passed to the component. In this case, it has two properties: `className` and `children`.

`_owner`

- This property, only accessible in nonproduction builds of React, is used internally by React to track the component that created this element. This information is used to determine which component should be responsible for updating the element when its props or state change.

  Here is an example that demonstrates how the `_owner` property is used:

  ```react
  function Parent() { 
    return <Child />;
  }
  
  function Child() {  
    const element = <div>Hello, world!</div>;  
    console.log(element._owner); // Parent  
    return element; 
  }
  ```

  In this example, the `Child` component creates a React element representing a `<div>` element with the text `"Hello, world!"`. The `_owner` property of this element is set to the `Parent` component, which is the component that created the `Child` component.

  React uses this information to determine which component should be responsible for updating the element when its props or state change. In this case, if the `Parent` component updates its state or receives new props, React will update the `Child` component and its associated element.

`_store`

- The `_store` property of a React element object is an object that is used internally by React to store additional data about the element. The specific properties and values stored in `_store` are not part of the public API and should not be accessed directly.

#### Virtual DOM Versus Real DOM

The `React.createElement` function and the DOM’s built-in `createElement` method are similar in that they both create new elements; however, `React.createElement` creates React elements and `document.createElement` creates DOM nodes. They’re vastly different in their implementation, but conceptually they’re similar.

`React.createElement` is a function provided by React that creates a new virtual element in memory, whereas `document.createElement` is a method provided by the DOM API that creates a new element also in memory until it is attached to the DOM with APIs like `document.appendChild` or similar. Both functions take a tag name as their first argument, while `React.createElement` takes additional arguments to specify props and children.

For example, let’s compare how we’d create a `<div>` element using both methods:

```js
// Using React's createElement 
const divElement = React.createElement(   
  "div", 
  { className: "my-class" }, 
  "Hello, World!" 
);

// Using the DOM API's createElement 
const divElement = document.createElement("div");
divElement.className = "my-class"; 
divElement.textContent = "Hello, World!";
```

When a React component is rendered, React creates a new virtual DOM tree, compares it to the previous virtual DOM tree, and calculates the minimum number of changes needed to update the old tree to match the new. This is known as the **reconciliation process**.

#### Unnecessary rerenders

While React’s diffing algorithm indeed plays a crucial role in efficiently updating the real DOM by minimizing the changes needed, there’s a common challenge that developers may encounter: unnecessary rerenders.

This is the way React works by design: when a component’s state changes, React rerenders the component and all of its descendants. By rerendering, we mean that React calls each function component recursively, passing each function component its props as an argument. React does not skip components whose props have not changed, but calls all function components that are children of a parent whose state or props change. This is because React doesn’t know which components depend on the state of the component that changed, so it has to rerender all of them to ensure that the UI stays consistent.

This can present some significant performance challenges, especially when dealing with large and complex user interfaces. For example, `ChildComponent` in the following snippet will rerender every time the `ParentComponent`’s state changes, even if the props passed to `ChildComponent` do not:

```react
import React, { useState } from "react"; 

const ChildComponent = ({ message }) => {   
  return <div>{message}</div>; 
};

const ParentComponent = () => { 
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);  
  
  return (   
    <div>   
      <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>Increment</button>
      <ChildComponent message="This is a static message" />  
    </div> 
  );
};

export default ParentComponent;
```

This is the problem that we often need to optimize, especially in larger applications where many components might be rerendering unnecessarily, leading to potential performance issues. Addressing this issue requires a thoughtful approach to managing component rerenders, ensuring that changes in state or props at a higher level in the component hierarchy do not result in widespread, unnecessary rerenders among descendant components. Through mindful structuring of components and judicious use of React’s optimization features like `memo` and `useMemo`, developers can better manage rerenders and maintain high performance in their applications. We cover this in more detail in Chapter 5.