# Object methods, "this"

## Method examples

For a start, let's teach the `user` to say hello:

```js run
let user = {
  name: "John",
  age: 30,
};

user.sayHi = function () {
  alert("Hello!");
};

user.sayHi(); // Hello!
```

Here we've just used a Function Expression to create a function and assign it to the property `user.sayHi` of the object.

Then we can call it as `user.sayHi()`. The user can now speak!

A function that is a property of an object is called its _method_.

So, here we've got a method `sayHi` of the object `user`.

Of course, we could use a pre-declared function as a method, like this:

```js run
let user = {
  // ...
};

// first, declare
function sayHi() {
  alert("Hello!");
}

// then add as a method
user.sayHi = sayHi;

user.sayHi(); // Hello!
```

### Method shorthand

There exists a shorter syntax for methods in an object literal:

```js
// these objects do the same

user = {
  sayHi: function () {
    alert("Hello");
  },
};

// method shorthand looks better, right?
user = {
  sayHi() {
    // same as "sayHi: function(){...}"
    alert("Hello");
  },
};
```

As demonstrated, we can omit `"function"` and just write `sayHi()`.

To tell the truth, the notations are not fully identical. There are subtle differences related to object inheritance (to be covered later), but for now they do not matter. In almost all cases, the shorter syntax is preferred.

## "this" in methods

It's common that an object method needs to access the information stored in the object to do its job.

For instance, the code inside `user.sayHi()` may need the name of the `user`.

**To access the object, a method can use the `this` keyword.**

The value of `this` is the object "before dot", the one used to call the method.

For instance:

```js run
let user = {
  name: "John",
  age: 30,

  sayHi() {
    // "this" is the "current object"
    alert(this.name);
  },
};

user.sayHi(); // John
```

Here during the execution of `user.sayHi()`, the value of `this` will be `user`.

Technically, it's also possible to access the object without `this`, by referencing it via the outer variable:

```js
let user = {
  name: "John",
  age: 30,

  sayHi() {
    alert(user.name); // "user" instead of "this"
  },
};
```

...But such code is unreliable. If we decide to copy `user` to another variable, e.g. `admin = user` and overwrite `user` with something else, then it will access the wrong object.

That's demonstrated below:

```js run
let user = {
  name: "John",
  age: 30,

  sayHi() {
    alert(user.name); // leads to an error
  },
};

let admin = user;
user = null; // overwrite to make things obvious

admin.sayHi(); // TypeError: Cannot read property 'name' of null
```

If we used `this.name` instead of `user.name` inside the `alert`, then the code would work.

## "this" is not bound

In JavaScript, keyword `this` behaves unlike most other programming languages. It can be used in any function, even if it's not a method of an object.

There's no syntax error in the following example:

```js
function sayHi() {
  alert(this.name);
}
```

The value of `this` is evaluated during the run-time, depending on the context.

For instance, here the same function is assigned to two different objects and has different "this" in the calls:

```js run
let user = { name: "John" };
let admin = { name: "Admin" };

function sayHi() {
  alert(this.name);
}

// use the same function in two objects
user.f = sayHi;
admin.f = sayHi;

// these calls have different this
// "this" inside the function is the object "before the dot"
user.f(); // John  (this == user)
admin.f(); // Admin  (this == admin)

admin["f"](); // Admin (dot or square brackets access the method – doesn't matter)
```

The rule is simple: if `obj.f()` is called, then `this` is `obj` during the call of `f`. So it's either `user` or `admin` in the example above.

We can even call the function without an object at all:

```js run
function sayHi() {
  alert(this);
}

sayHi(); // undefined
```

In this case `this` is `undefined` in strict mode. If we try to access `this.name`, there will be an error.

In non-strict mode the value of `this` in such case will be the _global object_ (`window` in a browser). This is a historical behavior that `"use strict"` fixes.

Usually such call is a programming error. If there's `this` inside a function, it expects to be called in an object context.

In JavaScript `this` is "free", its value is evaluated at call-time and does not depend on where the method was declared, but rather on what object is "before the dot".

## Arrow functions have no "this"

Arrow functions are special: they don't have their "own" `this`. If we reference `this` from such a function, it's taken from the outer "normal" function.

For instance, here `arrow()` uses `this` from the outer `user.sayHi()` method:

```js run
let user = {
  firstName: "Ilya",
  sayHi() {
    let arrow = () => alert(this.firstName);
    arrow();
  },
};

user.sayHi(); // Ilya
```

That's a special feature of arrow functions, it's useful when we actually do not want to have a separate `this`, but rather to take it from the outer context.
