# Optional chaining '?.'

The optional chaining `?.` is a safe way to access nested object properties, even if an intermediate property doesn't exist.

## Optional chaining

The optional chaining `?.` stops the evaluation if the value before `?.` is `undefined` or `null` and returns `undefined`.

**Further in this article, for brevity, we'll be saying that something "exists" if it's not `null` and not `undefined`.**

In other words, `value?.prop`:

- works as `value.prop`, if `value` exists,
- otherwise (when `value` is `undefined/null`) it returns `undefined`.

Here's the safe way to access `user.address.street` using `?.`:

```js run
let user = {}; // user has no address

alert(user?.address?.street); // undefined (no error)
```

The code is short and clean, there's no duplication at all.

Here's an example with `document.querySelector`:

```js run
let html = document.querySelector(".elem")?.innerHTML; // will be undefined, if there's no element
```

Reading the address with `user?.address` works even if `user` object doesn't exist:

```js run
let user = null;

alert(user?.address); // undefined
alert(user?.address.street); // undefined
```

Please note: the `?.` syntax makes optional the value before it, but not any further.

E.g. in `user?.address.street.name` the `?.` allows `user` to safely be `null/undefined` (and returns `undefined` in that case), but that's only for `user`. Further properties are accessed in a regular way. If we want some of them to be optional, then we'll need to replace more `.` with `?.`.

We should use `?.` only where it's ok that something doesn't exist.

For example, if according to our code logic `user` object must exist, but `address` is optional, then we should write `user.address?.street`, but not `user?.address?.street`.

Then, if `user` happens to be undefined, we'll see a programming error about it and fix it. Otherwise, if we overuse `?.`, coding errors can be silenced where not appropriate, and become more difficult to debug.

If there's no variable `user` at all, then `user?.anything` triggers an error:

```js run
// ReferenceError: user is not defined
user?.address;
```

The variable must be declared (e.g. `let/const/var user` or as a function parameter). The optional chaining works only for declared variables.

## Short-circuiting

As it was said before, the `?.` immediately stops ("short-circuits") the evaluation if the left part doesn't exist.

So, if there are any further function calls or operations to the right of `?.`, they won't be made.

```js run
let user = null;
let x = 0;

user?.sayHi(x++); // no "user", so the execution doesn't reach sayHi call and x++

alert(x); // 0, value not incremented
```

## Other variants: ?.(), ?.[]

The optional chaining `?.` is not an operator, but a special syntax construct, that also works with functions and square brackets.

For example, `?.()` is used to call a function that may not exist.

In the code below, some of our users have `admin` method, and some don't:

```js run
let userAdmin = {
  admin() {
    alert("I am admin");
  },
};

let userGuest = {};

userAdmin.admin?.(); // I am admin

userGuest.admin?.(); // nothing happens (no such method)
```

Here, in both lines we first use the dot (`userAdmin.admin`) to get `admin` property, because we assume that the `user` object exists, so it's safe read from it.

Then `?.()` checks the left part: if the `admin` function exists, then it runs (that's so for `userAdmin`). Otherwise (for `userGuest`) the evaluation stops without errors.

The `?.[]` syntax also works, if we'd like to use brackets `[]` to access properties instead of dot `.`. Similar to previous cases, it allows to safely read a property from an object that may not exist.

```js run
let key = "firstName";

let user1 = {
  firstName: "John",
};

let user2 = null;

alert(user1?.[key]); // John
alert(user2?.[key]); // undefined
```

Also we can use `?.` with `delete`:

```js run
delete user?.name; // delete user.name if user exists
```

The optional chaining `?.` has no use on the left side of an assignment.

```js run
let user = null;

user?.name = "John"; // Error, doesn't work
// because it evaluates to: undefined = "John"
```
