Douglas Waters stood at the window of the snooker room and looked down the drive towards the Dereham road. Headlamps illuminated the trees for a moment but then passed on into the night. Behind him, only the light above the table was switched on, leaving a rectangle of shadow around the edges of the room; the game that he had been playing by himself a few minutes earlier lay unfinished on the table, the balls scattered like irresolute atoms, bearing no apparent relationship to each other now that all movement had ceased. 

He glanced down at the watch, a present – another new and expensive watch to go with the others that were accumulating slowly in his bedside drawer. He ought to move them, put them somewhere safer, an easy target if a burglar ever managed to make it past the security system – heaven knows what they all added up to now… Still ten minutes to go, which meant that he would be here in less than that because he was never late. It was a winding country road, though, and not the easiest place to find. Those lights a couple of minutes ago might have been someone driving past, missing the turning, going right on into the village before they realized their mistake. That would add at least another ten minutes to anyone’s journey. He looked down at the watch again and found that another minute had passed. 

The door behind him opened, letting more light into the room. 

“Here you are. Are we boring you that much?” 

He looked over his shoulder as his wife crossed the room towards him, smiling to show that she didn’t mean it. 

“I’m sorry. Is Marcia much offended?” 

“No. There’s something interesting on the financial news, I think she’s taking notes. She never stops, does she?” 

His gaze returned to the window as he answered. 

“No, that’s why I employ her. Career woman to the end.” 

Jane Waters stood beside her husband and took his arm. For a moment she too stared down the drive through the ash trees towards the road. 

“So that’s what you really like, is it? The career woman – smart, driven, efficient. I’m not sure what it says about me.” 

He clamped his arm to his side, squeezing her hand. 

“It says you are my salvation.” 

There was a mutual silence; they both knew that he meant every word of that. Eventually, still without taking her eyes off the dark, **wintry** night in front of them, she spoke again. 

> [wintry](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/wintry): typical of winter

“I suppose this brings it all back in a way, him coming here tonight.” 

“We never fell out, never argued. In fact, it was him that told me to go, if that’s what I needed to do. I don’t know why we never stayed in touch.” 

“You needed the complete end to it, a complete separation from everything.” 

He smiled. 

“Ten years is a long time, a hell of a break, though! Ten years!” 

“And now it just seems like yesterday?” 

“Today, tonight, has brought things back, things that I’d not thought about in a long time. We’ve all changed, haven’t we? If we’ve all changed that much, this evening might be embarrassing.” 

“You said that from what Chris has told you, he hasn’t altered much at all.” 

“True. I just thought I’d warn you, even though you are the perfect hostess. It might all be over by nine o’clock.” 

“What’s the time now?” 

“Five to seven. That actually makes him late because he was always early – if that makes sense.” 

“Do you like the watch?” 

“I love it.” 

She poked him in the ribs. 

“Come back to the lounge, talk to Marcia while I go into the kitchen. He’ll be here soon.” 

“And you’re still OK with what I’m planning to say to him? Assuming that everything is still OK, that he hasn’t… Or I haven’t… You know what I mean.” 

She turned him away from the window and looked up at him. 

“Dougie, it’s just dinner with an old friend. Relax. Play it by ear, that’s what you always say. See how it goes. He’s just someone that you used to know, someone that you used to work with. Isn’t he?” 

Waters glanced out of the window and then looked back at her. In the sideways light from the table, she looked different, younger. 

“I hope so.” 

 

Smith reversed carefully into the field entrance, hoping that he had left the front wheels with enough purchase on solid ground to pull out again. He opened the new phone and tapped on maps – he’d had this phone for some months now but it would still be ‘new’, he supposed, until he had to think about replacing it some years into the future, though he somehow doubted that this new one would last as long as the old one – too much to go wrong in it. But just as Chris Waters had said, the pin thing was sort of pinging away, showing him his location. He enlarged the image by reverse pinching the screen, as he had been instructed, and now he could see the narrow road that he was on, and enlarging it again showed the turning that he had missed. And there was Dougie’s house, large enough and important enough to appear on this satellite image. Remarkable. 

It even had its own drive, he discovered three minutes later, winding through the trees that hid it from the road. Dougie must have installed a good security system, living out here in the wilds. Smith smiled to himself as he pulled into the parking space to the left of the double-fronted house, all lit up by spotlights. Four cars already there but room for several more, as if this was one of those discreet country places where you could hold small conferences for influential people. For a moment, he panicked; had he misunderstood what Dougie had said on the phone? Was this a major dinner party with local **dignitaries**? Surely not… 

> [dignitary](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/dignitary?q=dignitaries): a person who has an important position in a society

He debated for a moment and then took the bottle of wine with him to the front door. It was a good one, the **off-licence** manager who owed him a favour had promised him that, but he still felt like a teenager going to a party with some cheap **plonk**, just to get through the door. The door which opened before he had a chance to push the brass button below the little engraved plate that said ‘Ash House’. 

> [off-licence](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/off-licence): a shop that sells mainly alcoholic drinks to be taken away and drunk at home
>
> [plonk](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/plonk): cheap wine, especially wine that is not of good quality

“DC.” 

“Dougie.” 

They shook hands in the open doorway, the brightly lit hallway stretching in one direction and the black, chilly night in the other, but in reality both were for a moment back in the lounge bar of The Blue Boar. That was not their last meeting – there had been the leaving do and the speeches, the crowded late-night celebration afterwards in some other pub – but it was in The Blue Boar that they had been open about what the Andretti case had done to them both. It was there that their ways had parted a decade ago – and now, somehow, they had caught sight of each other once more. 

“DC, my wife, Jane. You’ve met before, a long time ago. And this is Marcia, my accountant, as well as our friend! Ladies, DC Smith.” 

Dougie was good at this, a proper businessman now, arranging introductions and drinks simultaneously, and everyone was smiling. Both women shook his outstretched hand, Jane a little **demurely** and Marcia not all so, but strongly, looking him directly in the eye as she said, inevitably, “DC?” 

> [demurely](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/demurely): (used especially of women) in a quiet and well behaved way

“I know not everyone’s into initials. I don’t know how it all started though – some terrible joke in a police station, I expect. David, DC, it’s all the same to me. Whatever you prefer.” 

“I’m going with David.” 

“Blimey –we’ve only known each other thirty seconds!” 

She wasn’t too **stuck up** to laugh aloud at that, and he thought that the evening would be OK after all. It had been a while though, and it felt a little odd. When Chris Waters had said to him a week ago, ‘You ought to get out more’ before springing the surprise invitation, he had been closer to the truth than he realized. 

> [stuck up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/stuck-up): too proud and considering yourself to be very important

 

“It’s a Moroccan dish, a tagine with lamb and **apricots**.”

> [apricot](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/apricot?q=apricots): a small, round, soft fruit with a pale orange, furry skin

Smith took another forkful from his plate and chewed it, **savouring** the combination of sweet dried fruit and spicy meat. 

> [savour](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/savour?q=savouring+): to enjoy food or an experience slowly, in order to enjoy it as much as possible

“It’s absolutely delicious, just like that starter – lovely.” 

“Thank you.” 

“But it’s time to **own up** now. You’ve got a couple of chefs in that kitchen, **beavering away**. You’re only in there a couple of minutes each time and then food like this appears.” 

> [own up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/own-up?q=own+up+): to admit that you have done something wrong
>
> [beaver away](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/beaver-away?q=beavering+away): to work hard for a long time

Jane Waters pulled a serious face. 

“I would never lie to you, DC. Dougie has told me how pointless that would be.” 

“So you’re not prepared to own up? I could get a warrant with no trouble and turn the place over.” 

Dougie was smiling as he reached over with the bottle of red, the one that Smith had brought. 

“DC, don’t hide your own light under a bushel – this is a great Shiraz, and the perfect accompaniment to a tagine.” 

Smith accepted a little more in his glass before holding up his hand. 

“Driving, Dougie. Can you imagine uniform’s delight if they pulled me over? I don’t know much about wine, but I know a man who does, thank goodness. As for your wife, I’m going to take her word for it, as long as she’s prepared to sign a **sworn statement**. That’ll do. I don’t know how I’d explain to Christopher why I’d taken his mother in for questioning.” 

> [sworn statement](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/sworn%20statement): a statement that someone makes under oath and swears to be true

Jane was laughing, and she glanced across at Marcia as she said, “Well, if you do take me in, I’d want the handcuffs and everything!” 

Now the laughter ran all around the table. 

“So, do you take them with you wherever you go, DC? The handcuffs, I mean.” 

“As it happens…” 

He made a gesture of reaching into his pocket and the laughter grew louder. It wasn’t the first **flirtatious** remark that Marcia had made to him since they had sat down to eat – all very tasteful, just a twinkle of **naughtiness**, and he imagined that she was playing her part, a lady brought in to entertain a male guest at an **intimate dinner party**. But it was fun – he hadn’t enjoyed company this much for a while. 

> [flirtatious](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/flirtatious?q=flirtatious+): behaving as if you are sexually attracted to someone, especially not in a serious way
>
> [naughtiness](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/naughtiness): behaviour or comments that involve or suggest sex
>
> [intimate dinner party](https://hinative.com/questions/25637412): a small party where you invite just your close friends for a sit-down dinner. The number of people depends on you, but it’s a small number.

And so it was no surprise when they had finished their first cup of coffee that Jane ordered the two of them back into the lounge while she and Dougie cleared the table. The armchairs were luxurious – deep, soft and supportive – and Smith thought again about just how well Dougie must have done to afford all this. The lady sitting opposite him, of course, would know to the penny just how well Argus Investigations was doing. Strange, isn’t it, how life turns about; ten years ago he was Dougie’s senior officer, advising him about how to deal with a professional and personal crisis, and now here he was having dinner with Dougie’s accountant. 

The thought must have left a trace of itself on his face. 

“What are you smiling about?” 

“Oh, just old times. When you haven’t seen someone for a while, things come back with a bit of a rush, I suppose.” 

“Ten years, Jane tells me. And then you bumped into Chris, and here we are.” 

Smith remembered her being introduced as a friend – she was clearly on good terms with the family, referring to Chris by his first name quite naturally. 

“Yes. It’s a winding old road, especially when you’ve got plenty of it to look back on.” 

Marcia was a good ten years younger than him, perhaps fifteen – he might as well make that clear from the start – not that he saw this as the start of anything but it was as well to be prepared. 

“And you’ve never thought of getting out of the force yourself? Using all that experience, building something up for yourself? Being your own boss?” 

“Yes, about once a week for the last twenty years. But then a case comes up, months go by sometimes, you get involved. It has its compensations. And I doubt if I’m any sort of businessman, to be honest.” 

“Neither was Dougie when he started.” 

“Fair point.” 

Clearing the table seemed to be taking some time. He listened and could hear no other sound in the house – perhaps Jane and Dougie were doing the same. Marcia eased off her shoes, tucked her legs under herself and then began to talk quite informally about how the company had developed since its beginning eight years ago. She knew staff numbers, annual **surpluses**, and **projections** into the future for profits and new **premises**. Argus was approaching the critical point at which it could become a major player in the rapidly expanding business of surveillance and information security. These were exciting times – and Smith could see that she meant it, that she was passionate about the project. He found it almost **disconcerting** – and then he remembered how Sheila would say to him, when a case was taking him over, ‘You’ve got that look on your face!’ Marcia had that look on her face. 

> [surplus](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/surplus): the amount of money you have left when you sell more than you buy, or spend less than you own
>
> [projection](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/projection?q=projections): a calculation or guess about the future based on information that you have
>
> [premises](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/premises): the land and buildings owned by someone, especially by a company or organization
>
> [disconcerting](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/disconcerting?q=disconcerting+): making someone feel uncertain and uncomfortable or worried

But Smith realized too that she was briefing him – this time together in the lounge had been planned before he came through the front door of Ash House. It wasn’t too difficult to see where things were heading. 

“And he thinks very highly of you…” 

Smith had to catch up a little, her last words having taken him unawares. 

“Well, thanks for that. The feeling’s mutual, and I’m sorry that we’ve been out of touch for so long.” 

“Who knows what-’ 

She stopped when the door opened and Jane entered with fresh coffee, followed by Dougie, carrying a tea towel as if he needed to convince them that he really had been busy in the kitchen. They sat, and the four of them chatted about families and old friends. It was Dougie who said that they were sorry to hear about Sheila, and Marcia asked a couple of questions about her, sensible, sensitive questions, because she wanted to know and because she wanted to show that she was not afraid to ask them. Then it was on to children and grandchildren, and some photographs, and Smith glanced at the fine antique clock on the mantelpiece and wondered how long it would be. 

At half past nine exactly, as if that too had been prearranged, Dougie said, “Do you fancy a game of **snooker**, DC?” 

> [snooker](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/snooker): 斯诺克台球

 

They used to play, several of them, down at the force’s social club – for a while it was a regular Friday night thing. As he watched Dougie setting up the table, Smith remembered all the names, and then, inevitably, he remembered some of the cases that they had worked on together. He could see the faces, see the information boards, see even the names and addresses of people who had been questioned and eliminated, never mind the villains themselves. And at home, on the shelves of his study, were the little black Alwych notebooks that held all that information and much more besides – he could go home tonight and check all the details that he was remembering now, as if his memory itself was being put on trial tomorrow. Those notebooks and these memories – was that what he had to show for three decades of work? How did they compare with what Dougie had managed to put together in the past few years? 

Dougie had finished. He rolled the white towards Smith and invited him to break. 

“It’s been a while, Dougie. In fact, the last game I played might have been with you down at the old social. I reckon I’m in for a caning.” 

He pushed firmly through the cue ball and clipped the inverted pyramid of reds midway down; some stayed together while others flew off towards both sides of the table. Dougie studied the position, one hand resting on the edge, as if this was the opening game of an important match, but Smith had already noticed that the table, though first class, was little used; there were no chalk marks either on the baize or the balls, not even the white, and the tip of his cue was brand new. 

Dougie missed his first attempt at a red, and so did Smith – they both laughed then and the tension had gone out of the game. 

“Are you sure that Jane doesn’t mind us getting away? She’d gone to a lot of trouble, Dougie – fantastic meal.” 

“No, DC. She’s always telling me to use it more – but I don’t know many people who play, to be honest. Chris and I have a game sometimes, and one of the sons-in-law is pretty good. He murdered me at Christmas!” 

Dougie’s first red had gone in, and he lined up on the blue. 

“That’s an easy one to solve then! How does it feel to be a granddad?” 

The blue went in and Dougie walked around, choosing his next red. 

“It’s a bigger deal than I expected. First of all it was just the usual worries, you know – will she be alright, will the baby be alright? But once it’s here… You remember doing it all the first time, but it’s different, different perspective on it, you notice more, how amazing it all is. My grandson, Marcus, only two but sharp as a razor! He…” 

He looked up at Smith and missed the red. 

“Sorry. Grandparents are among the world’s biggest bores to anyone who – well, you know what I mean.” 

But even that wasn’t the right thing to say, of course, and Smith sensed his embarrassment. To save him any more, Smith turned the conversation again. 

“When I got your invitation, Dougie, I didn’t think it was for a game of snooker. I thought it might be more of a boxing match. I thought you might want to land one on my nose.” 

Dougie laughed, shook his head and pushed the idea away with the hand that wasn’t holding the cue. The game had come to a temporary halt. 

“If that’s the worst Chris has to suffer while he’s on the job, I’ll be bloody grateful, DC. He hasn’t told me everything, I’m pleased to say, but that thug was **carrying**, wasn’t he? It could have been a hundred times worse than a broken nose.” 

> [carry](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/carry?q=carrying): relating to the carrying of a gun

“There was a bit of a **cock-up** – I felt sort of responsible. I wanted you to know that.” 

> [cock-up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/cock-up): something that is done wrong or badly

“Forget it – seriously. I was pleased he was working with you, even though it was a bit strange, to say the least. But how’s he doing? Tell me straight.” 

Smith moved round to size up a long pink after his first red had gone down. 

“I’m impressed with him, Dougie. He’s obviously got his mother’s brains – I must tell her that before I go – but he’s got instincts as well. He’s got the instinct that tells you when something isn’t right. You know exactly what I’m talking about. He’s a quick learner, and he’s got some **bottle**, too – trying to stop a gang of ex-marines entering that house on his own! He’s a good lad.” 

> [bottle](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/bottle): courage or willingness to take risks

He didn’t need to say any more. Dougie’s face was hidden in the shadow as Smith bent forward to take the shot but he could sense the fatherly pride, perhaps even the lump in the throat. The pink went down without touching the sides. 

“Oh – I can see you’re out of practice, DC. Thanks for what you said. Obviously I tried to talk him out of it, but, well, you know…” 

For their next few shots, it seemed they couldn’t miss, and Dougie kept the score on the wall-mounted, old-style sliding board with its ornate gold lettering. The conversation died away while they played that well but it wasn’t awkward, it wasn’t as if they had not spoken for ten years. Smith wondered how they had managed to waste all that time. 

“The case comes up soon, doesn’t it? What’s his name? Subic or something?” 

“Yes – Petar Subic.” 

“What will he get?”

Smith missed a straightforward red, muttered a mild swearword, stood up and reached for his last cigarette of the day. 

“No, here you are, DC. I got these in for tonight.” 

Dougie held out a pair of cigars. 

“No, thanks all the same. I’ll have a head like a block of concrete tomorrow if I smoke one of those – don’t know why. Probably allergic to the high life. I don’t like champagne, either. You go ahead.” 

“How about a brandy?” 

“Still driving tonight…” 

Dougie lit the cigar, and perhaps shook his head a little as he shook out the match – still there after all these years, the self-discipline, the self-control, the **self-contained** nature. 

> [self-contained](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/self-contained): A self-contained person does not have a large number of relationships with other people or does not depend on others for support.

“Anyway, the CPS are still **buggering around** with the charge. I’d say I can’t believe it but I can. We put some hard-faced, nasty piece of work in front of them with a case tighter than a duck’s you-know-what and they go for manslaughter; we put up Petar Subic who accidentally clonks someone and then tries to save his life, and some suit thinks it must be murder, at least.” 

> [bugger about](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/bugger-about): a rude phrase meaning to waste time doing silly or unimportant things

“What’s the plea situation?” 

“Hah! The lad is so full of remorse – genuinely – he’d plead guilty to anything. They could probably get him to own up to a couple of The Ripper’s jobs. Anyway, he’ll be alright in the end – for once I’m not sorry to see Mrs Gloria Butterfield on the case.” 

“Never heard the name.” 

“His **barrister**. She makes our life a misery sometimes but she’s dead straight. She’ll have the charge down to manslaughter and argue provocation until they don’t know where they are. He’ll plead to that and she’ll mitigate brilliantly.” 

> [barrister](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/barrister): a type of lawyer in the UK , Australia, and some other countries who can give specialized legal advice and can argue a case in both higher and lower courts

“You involved – or Chris, come to that?” 

Smith nodded and bent forward to take another shot at a red. 

“Informally approached to see if I’d confirm his **demeanour** at the arrest and in interview, which I would. Even with one good arm, I reckon he could have chucked both of us out of the window if he’d wanted to. It was a bit of a sad story.” 

> [demeanour](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/demeanour): a way of looking and behaving

“What will he get?”

“He’ll go inside but if Glorious Gloria is **on form**, not for long.” 

> [on form](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/on%20form): performing well

The red had gone down. Smith glanced up at the scoreboard; for the first time he was just ahead in the game. Dougie looked too and pulled a face. 

“I suppose I could sell this and get table tennis instead. You still enjoy it? All that rough and tumble in the courts, all the nonsense? All the politics at the station? Getting worse, isn’t it?” 

Chris might have told him something but it was just as likely that Dougie still had a few contacts on the force; in his line of work he would not have lost touch with everyone. Anyway, they were coming round to it at last. 

“It’s not what it was, Dougie, but nothing else is, either. We get older, things move on until eventually they’re out of sight almost, disappearing over the horizon. Then we sit down by the side of the road and wait for a hearse to come along.” 

“Nice!” 

Smith played a very slow, soft shot along the cushion and watched the first black of the game trickle into the pocket. Then he straightened up and chalked the tip of the cue, his eyes fixing on Dougie’s, eyebrows slightly raised, saying nothing. 

“OK, DC, OK. Talking to Chris, hearing about the case, it took me back a bit, made me think. I could tell that you weren’t – what did you say? Sitting by the side of the road? That was the old DC Smith that I used to work for. Whatever it is, you’ve still got it. I reckon it still gives you a buzz.” 

If that was a question, it wasn’t the sort that he was likely to answer – Smith moved to the end of the table to sight his next red. 

“That night in The Blue Boar, if you’d given me different advice… If you’d said, stick it out, stay in the force, I’d have done that. God knows what it would have done to my head after Andretti but I would.” 

The red wobbled in the jaws of the pocket but refused to go down. 

“I always said that Andretti murdered a lot more than four girls.” 

“Meaning?” 

“Innocence? Hope? I reckon you could add them to the list of victims.” 

Dougie sank the red that Smith had left over the pocket and the scores were level. 

“Anyway, you can see I’ve done alright. I’ve done a lot better than alright, and some of it is thanks to you.” 

“And you’d like the number of my Swiss bank account.” 

“I’m serious, DC.” 

The game had come to a halt again. Smith drew on the cigarette and then **stubbed it out** only half-smoked – in a glass ashtray with the golden eye symbol that he recognized as Dougie’s company logo. 

> [stub something out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/stub-out?q=stubbed+it+out): to stop a cigarette from burning by pressing the burning end against a hard surface

“Sorry Dougie. I know you’ll find it hard to believe but I’ve grown a little more **cynical** since we last met. What exactly are you on about, though?” 

> [cynical](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-simplified/cynical): believing that people are only interested in themselves and are not sincere

“Who wouldn’t be cynical? Budget cuts once a fortnight, endless reorganizations as a result, which are just another way of saying staffing cuts because of budget cuts. I hear they’re shutting down Frosty Winters’ divers?” 

Smith nodded – “Yes, another good bloke **peed off** forever.” 

> [piss someone off](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/piss-off): to annoy someone

“Well, that’s what I’m on about. As it becomes more about targets and budgets – and I know something about that now, God bless Marcia – the politicians take over. It’s less and less about the policing on the ground, it’s all about spreadsheets and the multi-media interface.” 

“I’m not sure about that last one but it all sounds vaguely familiar. So?” 

Dougie was working to a script, or at least a list. 

“And you mentioned the CPS **fiascos**. If you get past them, you’ve got left-wing judges systematically reducing average tariffs year by year, and a government that claims to be tough on crime closing prisons and putting ankle bracelets on rapists!” 

> [fiasco](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/fiasco?q=fiascos): something planned that goes wrong and is a complete failure, usually in an embarrassing way

“Yes… But apart from all that things aren’t too bad.” 

Dougie smiled and sat down in one of the chairs in front of the fireplace at the far end of the room. Smith followed suit and watched as Dougie waved a hand over the gas fire – it clicked and flickered automatically into life, giving out instant heat. 

“**Cut to the chase**, DC?” 

> [cut to the chase](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cut-to-the-chase?q=Cut+to+the+chase): to talk about or deal with the important parts of a subject and not waste time with things that are not important

“It’s always later than you think, Dougie.” 

“You’ve got your full pension now. Get out of it and start picking your own cases, start choosing how many days a week you want to work, and how many holidays a year you’d like, when you like. Talking of which, Chris tells me you still play a bit.” 

“I didn’t mean to embarrass the young folk.” 

“He’s still talking about it, couldn’t believe his ears. It reminded me of that night some of us came down to hear you in that band in the docks – I can’t remember the name, some sort of club.” 

“The old Western Star club.” 

“Something like that. Well, do some more of that with your free time.” 

Smith had forgotten about the Western Star. For a moment he could see Sheila sitting at the bar with her sister, waving to him across the crowded tables, and Buddy Walters on the drums behind him, good old Buddy Walters, also long gone now. 

“You’re offering me a job then?” 

Dougie leaned forward, ready for that. 

“No, absolutely not. Pay all that tax? Work for Argus as a freelance, be self-employed. Some of the lads take the employed route but you’d be daft to do that. Effectively, you could be your own boss.” 

“What sort of cases?” 

He had to be wary of sounding too interested but something in what Dougie had said had caught his attention. He would decide later what it was. 

“Your kind.” 

“Well, I never did get divorced, so-’ 

“Everyone assumes that, DC. It’s a **cliché** now. Yes, we do a few, for the **well off** – I won’t hide that, it helps to pay the way. But the future is in information security, intellectual property rights, staff screening and commercial surveillance. Don’t laugh, I’m no more **tech-savvy** than you are, but I can pay for people who are. But they don’t understand investigation – we do.” 

> [cliché](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cliche?q=clich%C3%A9): a phrase, remark, or opinion that has very often been said or expressed before and is therefore not original and not interesting
>
> [well off](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/well-off): rich
>
> [tech-savvy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/tech-savvy): knowing a lot about modern technology, especially computers

“I still don’t see why you’d need someone like me.” 

“Two reasons. The workload really wants to grow – we’re turning stuff away that we shouldn’t because there’s only Murphy and me – yes, he’s Irish – who can manage the investigation side of bigger accounts. Second, I need to ease off a bit, see more of the kids and their kids, and, well, some doctor’s orders in there as well.” 

Smith raised an eyebrow and stared into the artificial flames; so clever that, you’d hardly know they were not the real thing. 

“You’d be a – a consultant, DC. You could have first look over new prospects and choose what you wanted to work on, manage a couple of interesting cases, all on a part-time basis. Look nice on one of our cards - ‘Consultant Detective’.” 

“I wouldn’t have to do any of that sales training, would I?” 

Dougie frowned for a moment before he picked it up. 

“Sorry! Force of habit now – we sometimes have to bid for the most **lucrative** contracts. None of that would come your way, DC. I just need someone else I can trust around the place. It’s as simple as that, but some of the work is interesting, really challenging. I think you’d enjoy it.” 

> [lucrative](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/lucrative): (especially of a business, job, or activity) producing a lot of money

“Well, it’s a thought.” 

“That’ll do for me, DC. Give it some thought, no pressure.” 

Smith could hear a **chirping** noise somewhere in the room – must be a cricket in here and the fire had warmed it up. Very Dickensian but surely the house was not that old. He looked up at Dougie and saw him pointing back and smiling. 

> [chirp](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/chirp?q=chirping): (especially of a bird) to make a short high sound or sounds

“I think it’s your phone!” 

“Eh? Oh bugger, the ringtone keeps changing itself, I swear it isn’t me doing it.” 

He slid his finger across the screen and looked at the number. 

“Sorry Dougie – it’s work.” 

He stood up and walked over towards the heavy curtains that concealed **patio** doors and a view of the **floodlit** garden beyond; Dougie sat quietly smoking, hearing one side of the conversation. 

> [patio](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/patio): an area outside a house with a solid floor but no roof, used in good weather for relaxing, eating, etc.
>
> [floodlit](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/floodlit): lit by floodlights

“Should be in at two o’clock, ma’am – why?” 

There was an indistinct shout on the line, a woman’s voice, and Smith smiled briefly. Then he looked across at Dougie and raised his eyebrows as he listened to the answer. 

“OK, eight. No, not a problem. Hold on – before you go, just give me a clue, one sentence, what’s it about?” 

He listened again for half a minute or so – it must have been a long sentence – and then gave a name, “Maggie Henderson, definitely”, before saying goodbye to whoever was on the end of the line. He walked back to the seat, a half-apologetic look on his face. 

“Emergency budget cut meeting? First reorganisation of the week?” 

But this time Smith didn’t respond in kind; the apologetic look was already history and its place had been taken a by a half-frown that might puzzlement or concentration or a blend of both. 

“No, it’s a case by the sound of it.” 

“A good one?” 

Smith was **fiddling** with his phone now, abstractedly, trying to find out where the cricket had come from, and how to send it back there. 

> [fiddle](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/fiddle): to move things about or touch things with no particular purpose

“Quite the opposite, I’m guessing.” 

“Why?” 

“Routine autopsy **throws up** very un-routine result.” 

[throw something up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/throw-up?q=throws+up+): to produce new problems or ideas

“How long ago?” 

“About a month as far as I can make out.” 

Dougie sat in silence for a moment, remembering the odd mingled feelings of apprehension and excitement. 

“That’s a pretty cold trail, then. I don’t envy you that one, DC” 

Smith closed the phone – as far as he could tell he was back on **wind-chimes** but only the next call would make it certain. 

> [wind chimes](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/wind-chimes): 風鈴

“Dougie, I’m going to have to leave, early start and all that now. Sorry about that. I’ll just go and make my apologies to your Mrs and your accountant.” 

The other man was already on his feet, having anticipated what was coming, hand outstretched. 

“Think about what I said, DC – your own cases, your own hours, your own boss. There wouldn’t be anything like this any more.” 

Smith took the hand and said, “No Dougie, I don’t suppose there would.” 