**Rachel:** God. I feel violated.

**Monica:** Did anybody else feel they just wanted to peel the skin off their body, to have something else to do?

**Chandler:** (staring at a woman across the room) Ross, ten o'clock.

**Ross:** Is it? Feels like two.

**Chandler:** No, **ten o'clock**.

**Ross:** What?

**Chandler:** (sighs and gestures to explain) There's a beautiful woman at eight, nine, ten o'clock!

**Ross:** Oh. Hel-lo!

**Chandler:** She's amazing! She makes the women that I dream about look like short, fat, bald men!

**Monica:** Well, go over to her! She's not with anyone.

**Chandler:** Oh yeah, and what would my opening line be? 'Excuse me. Blarrglarrghh.'

**Rachel:** Oh, c'mon. She's a person, you can do it!

**Chandler:** Oh please, could she **be** more out of my league? Ross, back me up here.

**Ross:** He could never get a woman like that in a million years.

**Chandler:** Thank you, buddy.

**Phoebe:** Oh, oh, but y'know, you always see these really beautiful women with these really nothing guys, you could be one of those guys.

**Monica:** You could do that!

**Chandler:** Y'think?

**All:** Yeah!

**Chandler:** Oh God, I can't believe I'm even considering this... I'm very very aware of my tongue...

**Ross:** C'mon! C'mon!

**Chandler:** Here goes. (He walks over to her but just stands there.)

**Aurora:** ...Yes?

**Chandler:** Hi.... um... okay, next word... would be... Chandler! Chandler is my name, and, uh...(He clears his throat noisily)...hi.

**Aurora:** Yes, you said that.

**Chandler:** Yes, yes I did, but what I didn't say was what I was about to say, what I wanted to say was, uh... would you like to go out with me sometime, thankyou, goodnight. (He walks back to the others but she calls him back.)

**Aurora:** Chandler?

(Joey enters from behind a curtain. The others all talk at once.)

**All:** Hey! You're in a play! I didn't know you could dance! You had a beard!

**Joey:** Whadja think?

(Pause)

**All:** ...Hey! You're in a play! I didn't know you could dance! You had a beard!

**Joey:** C'mon, you guys, it wasn't that bad. It was better than that thing I did with the trolls, at least you got to see my head.

**All:** (admitting) Saw your head. Saw your head.

**Chandler:** (running back) She said yes!! She said yes!! (To Joey) Awful play, man. Whoah. (To All) Her name's Aurora, and she's Italian, and she pronounces my name 'Chand-lrr'. 'Chand-lrr'. I think I like it better that way. (To Joey) Oh, listen, the usher gave me this to give to you. (He fishes a card out of his pocket.)

**Rachel:** What is it?

**Joey:** The Estelle Leonard Talent Agency. Wow, an agency left me its card! Maybe they wanna sign me!

**Phoebe:** Based on *this play*? ...Based on this play!

[Scene: Central Perk, everyone else is there as Chandler enters.]

**Chandler:** Hey, kids.

**All:** Hey.

**Phoebe:** (reading Monica's palm) No, 'cause this line is passion, and this is... just a line.

**Chandler:** Well, I can't believe I've been here almost seven seconds and you haven't asked me how my date went.

**Monica:** Oh, right, right. How was your date, 'Chand-lrr'?

**Chandler:** It was unbelievable. I-I've never met anyone like her. She's had the most amazing life! She was in the Israeli army...

**Chandler:** We talked 'til like two. It was this perfect evening... more or less.

***Aurora:** ...All of a sudden we realised we were in Yammon.*

***Chandler:** Oh, I'm sorry, so 'we' is?**Aurora:** 'We' would be me and Rick.*

**Joey:** Who's Rick?

***Chandler:** Who's Rick?*

***Aurora:** My husband.*

**All:** Ooooohhh.

***Chandler:** Oh, so you're divorced?*

***Aurora:** No.*

***Chandler:** Oh, I'm sorry, then you're widowed?...Hopefully?*

***Aurora:** No, I'm still married.*

***Chandler:** So tell me, how do- how do you think your husband would feel about you sitting here with me?...Sliding your foot so far up my pant leg you can count the change in my pocket?*

***Aurora:** Don't worry. I imagine he'd be okay with you because really, he's okay with Ethan.*

***Chandler:** Ethan? There's, there's an Ethan?*

***Aurora:** Mmmm... Ethan is my... boyfriend.*

**All:** What?!

***Chandler:** So explain something to me here, uh, what kind of a relationship do you imagine us having if you already have a husband and a boyfriend?*

***Aurora:** I suppose mainly sexual.*

***Chandler:** ...Hm.*

**Monica:** Oh. I'm sorry it didn't work out.

**Chandler:** What 'not work out'? I'm seeing her again on Thursday. Didn't you listen to the story?

**Monica:** Didn't you listen to the story? I mean, this is twisted! How could you get involved with a woman like this?

**Chandler:** Well, y'know, I had some trouble with it at first too, but the way I look at it is, I get all the good stuff: all the fun, all the talking, all the sex; and **none** of the responsibility. I mean, this is every guy's fantasy!

**Phoebe:** Oh, yeah. That is not true. Ross, is this your fantasy?

**Ross:** No, of course not! (Thinks) ...Yeah, yeah, it is.

**Monica:** What? So you guys don't mind going out with someone else who's going out with someone else?

**Joey:** I couldn't do it.

**Monica:** Good for you, Joey.

**Joey:** When I'm with a woman, I need to *know* that I'm going out with more people than she is.

**Ross:** Well, y'know, monogamy can be a, uh, tricky concept. I mean, anthropologically speaking-

(They all pretend to fall asleep.)

**Ross:** Fine. Fine, alright, now you'll never know.

**Monica:** We're kidding. C'mon, tell us!

**All:** Yeah! C'mon!

**Ross:** Alright. There's a theory, put forth by Richard Leakey-

(They all fall asleep again.)

[Scene: Monica and Rachel's, Rachel is there as enter except Joey enter.]

**Rachel:** Tah-daaah!

**Chandler:** Are we greeting each other this way now? 'Cause I like that.

**Rachel:** Look! I cleaned! I did the windows, I did the floors... I even used all the attachments on the vacuum, except that little round one with the bristles, I don't know what that's for.

**Ross:** Oh yeah, nobody knows. And we're not supposed to ask.

**Rachel:** Well, whaddya think?

**All:** Very clean! It looks great! Terrific!

**Monica:** ...Oh! I-I see you moved the green ottoman.

**All:** Uh-oh...

**Monica:** How-how did that happen?

**Rachel:** I dunno.. I-I thought it looked better there. And I- and also, it's an extra seat around the coffee table.

**Monica:** Yeah, yeah, it's interesting.. but y'know what? Just for fun, let's see what it looked like in the old spot. (She moves it.) Alright, just to compare. Let's see. Well, it looks good there too. Let's just leave it there for a while.

**Phoebe:** (to Rachel) I can't believe you tried to move the green ottoman.

**Chandler:** Thank God you didn't try to **fan out** the magazines. I mean, she'll scratch your eyes right out.

> [fan out](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/fan-out?q=fan+out+): If a group of people fan out, they move in different directions from a single point.

**Monica:** You guys, I am not that bad!

**Phoebe:** Yeah, you are, Monica. Remember when I lived with you? You were like, a little, y'know, (psycho) Ree! Ree! Ree! Ree!

**Monica:** That is so unfair!

**Ross:** Oh c'mon! When we were kids, yours was the only Raggedy Ann doll that wasn't **raggedy**!

> [raggedy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/raggedy?q=Raggedy): untidy, torn and looking a little dirty

**Monica:** Okay, so I'm responsible, I'm organised. But hey, I can be a **kook**.

> [kook](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/kook): a strange person

**Ross:** Alright, you madcap gal. Try to imagine this. The phone bill arrives, but you don't pay it right away.

**Monica:** Why not?

**Ross:** Because you're a kook! Instead you wait until they send you a notice.

**Monica:** I could do that.

**Rachel:** Okay, uh, you let me go grocery shopping, and I buy laundry detergent, but it's not the one with the easy-pour spout.

**Monica:** Why would someone do that?! ...One might wonder.

**Chandler:** Someone's left a glass on the coffee table. There's no coaster. It's a cold drink, it's a hot day. Little beads of condensation are inching their way closer and closer to the surface of the wood...

**Monica:** STOP IT!! ...Oh my God. It's true! Who am I?

**Ross:** Monica? You're Mom.

(Monica gasps.)

**Phoebe:** Ree! Ree! Ree! Ree! Ree!

(Joey enters and he's on the phone.)

**Joey:** (on phone) Uh huh.. uh huh... oh my God! Okay! Okay, I'll be there! (He hangs up and to all.) That was my agent. (He tosses and catches the phone.) My agent has just gotten me a job...in the new Al Pacino movie!

**All:** Oh my God! Whoah!

**Monica:** Well, what's the part?

**Joey:** Can you believe this? Al Pacino! This guy's the reason I became an actor! "I'm out of order? Pfeeeh. You're out of order! This whole courtroom's out of order!"

**Phoebe:** Seriously, what-what's the part?

**Joey:** "Just when I thought I was out, they pull me back in!"

**Ross:** C'mon, seriously, Joey, what's the part?

**Joey:** ...I'm his (mumbles)

**Rachel:** ..You're, you're 'mah mah mah' what?

**Joey:** ...I'm his butt double. 'Kay? I play Al Pacino's butt. Alright? He goes into the shower, and then- I'm his butt.

**Monica:** (trying not to laugh) Oh my God.

**Joey:** C'mon, you guys. This is a real movie, and Al Pacino's in it, and that's big!

**Chandler:** Oh no, it's terrific, it's... it's... y'know, you deserve this, after all your years of struggling, you've finally been able to crack your way into showbusiness.

**Joey:** Okay, okay, fine! Make jokes, I don't care! This is a big break for me!

**Ross:** You're right, you're right, it is...So you gonna invite us all to the big opening?