##  4

BY THE LATE SUMMER the news of what had happened on Animal Farm had spread across half the county. Every day Snowball and Napoleon sent out flights of pigeons whose instructions were to mingle with the animals on neighbouring farms, tell them the story of the Rebellion, and teach them the tune of "Beasts of England."

Most of this time Mr. Jones had spent sitting in the **taproom** of the Red Lion at Willingdon, complaining to anyone who would listen of the monstrous injustice he had suffered in being turned out of his property by a pack of **good-for-nothing** animals. The other farmers sympathised **in principle**, but they did not at first give him much help. At heart, each of them was secretly wondering whether he could not somehow turn Jones's misfortune to his own advantage. It was lucky that the owners of the two farms which adjoined Animal Farm were **on permanently bad terms**. One of them, which was named Foxwood, was a large, neglected, old-fashioned farm, much overgrown by woodland, with all its pastures worn out and its hedges in a disgraceful condition. Its owner, Mr. Pilkington, was an easy-going gentleman farmer who spent most of his time in fishing or hunting according to the season. The other farm, which was called Pinchfield, was smaller and better kept. Its owner was a Mr. Frederick, a tough, shrewd man, perpetually involved in lawsuits and with a name for driving hard bargains. These two disliked each other so much that it was difficult for them to come to any agreement, even in defence of their own interests.

> [taproom](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/tap-room?q=taproom): a pub or bar, or part of one, where beer is served from taps, and other drinks and sometimes food are sold
>
> [good-for-nothing](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/good-for-nothing): a person who is lazy and not helpful or useful
>
> [in principle](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/in-principle): If you agree with or believe something in principle, you agree with the idea in general, although you might not support it in reality or in every situation.
>
> [be on good/bad/excellent terms (with sb)](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/term?q=bad+terms): to have a good, etc. relationship with someone

 Nevertheless, they were both thoroughly frightened by the rebellion on Animal Farm, and very anxious to prevent their own animals from learning too much about it. At first they pretended to laugh to scorn the idea of animals managing a farm for themselves. The whole thing would be over in a fortnight, they said. They put it about that the animals on the Manor Farm (they insisted on calling it the Manor Farm; they would not tolerate the name "Animal Farm") were perpetually fighting among themselves and were also rapidly starving to death. When time passed and the animals had evidently not starved to death, Frederick and Pilkington changed their tune and began to talk of the terrible **wickedness** that now flourished on Animal Farm. It was given out that the animals there practised **cannibalism**, tortured one another with red-hot horseshoes, and had their females in common. This was what came of rebelling against the laws of Nature, Frederick and Pilkington said.

> [wickedness](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/wickedness): the fact of being morally very wrong or bad
>
> [cannibalism](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cannibalism): the practice of a person who eats human flesh, or the behaviour of an animal that eats others of its own type

However, these stories were never fully believed. Rumours of a wonderful farm, where the human beings had been turned out and the animals managed their own affairs, continued to circulate in vague and distorted forms, and throughout that year a wave of rebelliousness ran through the countryside. Bulls which had always been **tractable** suddenly turned savage, sheep broke down hedges and devoured the clover, cows kicked the **pail** over, **hunters** refused their fences and shot their riders on to the other side. Above all, the tune and even the words of "Beasts of England" were known everywhere. It had spread with astonishing speed. The human beings could not contain their rage when they heard this song, though they pretended to think it merely ridiculous. They could not understand, they said, how even animals could bring themselves to sing such **contemptible** rubbish. Any animal caught singing it was given a **flogging** on the spot. And yet the song was **irrepressible**. The blackbirds whistled it in the hedges, the pigeons **cooed** it in the elms, it got into the **din** of the **smithies** and the tune of the church bells. And when the human beings listened to it, they secretly trembled, hearing in it a prophecy of their future doom.

> [tractable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/tractable): easily dealt with, controlled, or persuaded
>
> [pail](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/pail): a bucket
>
> [hunter](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/hunter?q=hunters): a type of horse, especially one used in hunting animals
>
> [contemptible](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/contemptible): deserving contempt
>
> [flogging](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/flogging): a punishment in which someone is beaten severely with a whip or a stick
>
> [irrepressible](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/irrepressible): full of energy and enthusiasm; impossible to stop
>
> [coo](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/coo?q=cooed): When birds such as doves and pigeons coo, they make a low soft sound.
>
> [din](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/din): a loud, unpleasant confused noise that lasts for a long time
>
> [smithy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/smithy?q=smithies): a place where things are made out of metal, especially iron or steel, by heating and using a hammer

 Early in October, when the corn was cut and stacked and some of it was already threshed, a flight of pigeons came whirling through the air and alighted in the yard of Animal Farm in the wildest excitement. Jones and all his men, with half a dozen others from Foxwood and Pinchfield, had entered the five-barred gate and were coming up the cart-track that led to the farm. They were all carrying sticks, except Jones, who was marching ahead with a gun in his hands. Obviously they were going to attempt the recapture of the farm.

This had long been expected, and all preparations had been made. Snowball, who had studied an old book of Julius Caesar's campaigns which he had found in the farmhouse, was in charge of the defensive operations. He gave his orders quickly, and in a couple of minutes every animal was at his post.

As the human beings approached the farm buildings, Snowball launched his first attack. All the pigeons, to the number of thirty-five, flew to and fro over the men's heads and muted upon them from mid-air; and while the men were dealing with this, the geese, who had been hiding behind the hedge, rushed out and pecked viciously at the calves of their legs. However, this was only a light **skirmishing** manoeuvre, intended to create a little disorder, and the men easily drove the geese off with their sticks. Snowball now launched his second line of attack. Muriel, Benjamin, and all the sheep, with Snowball at the head of them, rushed forward and prodded and butted the men from every side, while Benjamin turned round and lashed at them with his small hoofs. But once again the men, with their sticks and their hob-nailed boots, were too strong for them; and suddenly, at a squeal from Snowball, which was the signal for retreat, all the animals turned and fled through the gateway into the yard.

> [skirmish](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/skirmish?q=skirmishing): to fight for a short time with a small group of people, away from the main area of fighting in a war

 The men gave a shout of triumph. They saw, as they imagined, their enemies in flight, and they rushed after them in disorder. This was just what Snowball had intended. As soon as they were well inside the yard, the three horses, the three cows, and the rest of the pigs, who had been lying in ambush in the cowshed, suddenly emerged in their rear, cutting them off. Snowball now gave the signal for the charge. He himself dashed straight for Jones. Jones saw him coming, raised his gun and fired. The pellets **scored** bloody streaks along Snowball's back, and a sheep dropped dead. Without halting for an instant, Snowball flung his fifteen stone against Jones's legs. Jones was hurled into a pile of dung and his gun flew out of his hands. But the most terrifying **spectacle** of all was Boxer, rearing up on his hind legs and striking out with his great iron-**shod** hoofs like a **stallion**. His very first blow took a **stable-lad** from Foxwood on the skull and stretched him lifeless in the mud. At the sight, several men dropped their sticks and tried to run. Panic overtook them, and the next moment all the animals together were chasing them round and round the yard. They were **gored**, kicked, bitten, trampled on. There was not an animal on the farm that did not take vengeance on them after his own fashion. Even the cat suddenly leapt off a roof onto a cowman's shoulders and sank her claws in his neck, at which he yelled horribly. At a moment when the opening was clear, the men were glad enough to rush out of the yard and make a bolt for the main road. And so within five minutes of their invasion they were in **ignominious** retreat by the same way as they had come, with a flock of geese hissing after them and pecking at their calves all the way.

> [score](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/score?q=scored): to succeed in an activity or to achieve something
>
> [spectacle](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/spectacle): a public event or show that is exciting to watch
>
> [shoe](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/shoe): If you shoe a horse, you nail a horseshoe (= a curved piece of metal) to one or each of its feet.
>
> [stallion](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/stallion): an adult male horse that is used for breeding
>
> [stable boy](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/stable-boy?q=stable-lad+): a young man who works in a stable and takes care of the horses
>
> [gore](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gore): (of an animal) to cause an injury to someone, or damage something, with the horns or tusks
>
> [ignominious](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/ignominious): (especially of events or behaviour) embarrassing because of being a complete failure

 All the men were gone except one. Back in the yard Boxer was **pawing** with his hoof at the stable-lad who lay face down in the mud, trying to turn him over. The boy did not stir.

> [paw](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/paw): to touch something with a paw

"He is dead," said Boxer sorrowfully. "I had no intention of doing that. I forgot that I was wearing iron shoes. Who will believe that I did not do this on purpose?"

"No sentimentality, comrade!" cried Snowball, from whose wounds the blood was still dripping. "War is war. The only good human being is a dead one."

"I have no wish to take life, not even human life," repeated Boxer, and his eyes were full of tears.

"Where is Mollie?" exclaimed somebody.

Mollie in fact was missing. For a moment there was great alarm; it was feared that the men might have harmed her in some way, or even carried her off with them. In the end, however, she was found hiding in her stall with her head buried among the hay in the **manger**. She had taken to flight as soon as the gun went off. And when the others came back from looking for her, it was to find that the stable-lad, who in fact was only **stunned**, had already recovered and made off.

> [manger](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/manger): an open box from which cattle and horses feed
>
> [stun](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/stun): to make a person or animal unconscious or unable to think normally, especially by hitting their head hard

The animals had now **reassembled** in the wildest excitement, each recounting his own **exploits** in the battle at the top of his voice. An **impromptu** celebration of the victory was held immediately. The flag was run up and "Beasts of England" was sung a number of times, then the sheep who had been killed was given a solemn funeral, a hawthorn bush being planted on her grave. At the graveside Snowball made a little speech, emphasising the need for all animals to be ready to die for Animal Farm if need be.

> [reassemble](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/reassemble?q=reassembled): to come together again, or bring something together again, in a single place
>
> [exploit](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/exploit?q=exploits): something unusual, brave, or funny that someone has done
>
> [impromptu](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/impromptu): done or said without earlier planning or preparation

The animals decided unanimously to create a military **decoration**, "Animal Hero, First Class," which was **conferred** there and then on Snowball and Boxer. It consisted of a brass medal (they were really some old horse-brasses which had been found in the harness-room), to be worn on Sundays and holidays. There was also "Animal Hero, Second Class," which was conferred **posthumously** on the dead sheep.

> [decoration](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/decoration): a medal given to someone and worn as an honour
>
> [confer](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/confer?q=conferred): to give an official title, honour, or advantage to someone
>
> [posthumously](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/posthumously): after a person's death

There was much discussion as to what the battle should be called. In the end, it was named the Battle of the Cowshed, since that was where the ambush had been **sprung**. Mr. Jones's gun had been found lying in the mud, and it was known that there was a supply of **cartridges** in the farmhouse. It was decided to set the gun up at the foot of the **flagstaff**, like a piece of **artillery**, and to fire it twice a year—once on October the twelfth, the anniversary of the Battle of the Cowshed, and once on Midsummer Day, the anniversary of the Rebellion.

> [spring](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/spring): to appear suddenly
>
> [cartridge](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cartridge?q=cartridges): a small tube containing an explosive substance and a bullet for use in a gun
>
> [flagpole](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/flagpole): a long pole that a flag is fastened to
>
> [artillery](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/artillery): very large guns that are moved on wheels or metal tracks, or the part of the army that uses these