##  5

AS WINTER DREW ON, Mollie became more and more troublesome. She was late for work every morning and excused herself by saying she had overslept, and she complained of mysterious pains, although her appetite was excellent. On every kind of **pretext** she would run away from work and go to the drinking pool, where she would stand foolishly gazing at her own reflection in the water. But there were also rumours of something more serious. One day as Mollie strolled **blithely** into the yard, flirting her long tail and chewing at a stalk of hay, Clover took her aside.

> [pretext](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/pretext): a pretended reason for doing something that is used to hide the real reason
>
> [blithely](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/blithely): happily and without feeling or showing any worry, especially when there is a reason to be worried

"Mollie," she said, "I have something very serious to say to you. This morning I saw you looking over the hedge that divides Animal Farm from Foxwood. One of Mr. Pilkington's men was standing on the other side of the hedge. And—I was a long way away, but I am almost certain I saw this—he was talking to you and you were allowing him to stroke your nose. What does that mean, Mollie?"

 "He didn't! I wasn't! It isn't true!" cried Mollie, beginning to **prance** about and paw the ground.

> [prance](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/prance): to walk in an energetic way and with more movement than necessary

"Mollie! Look me in the face. Do you give me your word of honour that that man was not stroking your nose?"

"It isn't true!" repeated Mollie, but she could not look Clover in the face, and the next moment she took to her heels and galloped away into the field.

A thought struck Clover. Without saying anything to the others, she went to Mollie's stall and turned over the straw with her hoof. Hidden under the straw was a little pile of lump sugar and several bunches of ribbon of different colours.

Three days later Mollie disappeared. For some weeks nothing was known of her whereabouts, then the pigeons reported that they had seen her on the other side of Willingdon. She was between the shafts of a smart dogcart painted red and black, which was standing outside a public-house. A fat red-faced man in check **breeches** and **gaiters**, who looked like a **publican**, was stroking her nose and feeding her with sugar. Her coat was newly clipped and she wore a scarlet ribbon round her forelock. She appeared to be enjoying herself, so the pigeons said. None of the animals ever mentioned Mollie again.

> [breeches](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/breeches): trousers that do not cover the whole of the leg
>
> [gaiters](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gaiters): a pair of coverings for the lower half of the legs, often worn in the past but worn now mainly by people who go walking or climbing in order to stop earth and water from entering their boots
>
> [publican](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/publican): the manager of a pub

In January there came bitterly hard weather. The earth was like iron, and nothing could be done in the fields. Many meetings were held in the big barn, and the pigs occupied themselves with planning out the work of the coming season. It had come to be accepted that the pigs, who were **manifestly** cleverer than the other animals, should decide all questions of farm policy, though their decisions had to be **ratified** by a majority vote. This arrangement would have worked well enough if it had not been for the disputes between Snowball and Napoleon. These two disagreed at every point where disagreement was possible. If one of them suggested sowing a bigger **acreage** with barley, the other was certain to demand a bigger acreage of oats, and if one of them said that such and such a field was just right for cabbages, the other would declare that it was useless for anything except roots. Each had his own following, and there were some violent debates. At the Meetings Snowball often won over the majority by his brilliant speeches, but Napoleon was better at **canvassing** support for himself in between times. He was especially successful with the sheep. Of late the sheep had taken to bleating "Four legs good, two legs bad" both in and out of season, and they often interrupted the Meeting with this. It was noticed that they were especially liable to break into "Four legs good, two legs bad" at crucial moments in Snowball's speeches. Snowball had made a close study of some back numbers of the Farmer and Stockbreeder which he had found in the farmhouse, and was full of plans for innovations and improvements. He talked **learnedly** about field-drains, **silage**, and basic slag, and had worked out a complicated scheme for all the animals to drop their dung directly in the fields, at a different spot every day, to save the labour of **cartage**. Napoleon produced no schemes of his own, but said quietly that Snowball's would come to nothing, and seemed to be biding his time. But of all their controversies, none was so bitter as the one that took place over the **windmill**.

> [manifestly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/manifestly): very obviously
>
> [ratify](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/ratify?q=ratified): (especially of governments or organizations) to make an agreement official
>
> [acreage](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/acreage): the size of an area of land in acres (= a unit for measuring area, equal to 4,047 square metres or 4,840 square yards), or an area of land that can be measured in acres
>
> [canvass](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/canvass?q=canvassing): to try to get political support or votes, especially by visiting all the houses in an area
>
> [learnedly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/learnedly): in a way that shows a person has studied for a long time and has a lot of knowledge
>
> [silage](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/silage): grass or other green plants that are cut and stored, without being dried first, to feed cattle in winter
>
> [cartage](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/cartage): the transporting of goods by road, usually over short distances
>
> [windmill](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/windmill): a building or structure with large blades on the outside that, when turned by the force of the wind, provide the power for getting water out of the ground or crushing grain

 In the long pasture, not far from the farm buildings, there was a small knoll which was the highest point on the farm. After surveying the ground, Snowball declared that this was just the place for a windmill, which could be made to operate a dynamo and supply the farm with electrical power. This would light the stalls and warm them in winter, and would also run a circular saw, a chaff-cutter, a mangel-slicer, and an electric milking machine. The animals had never heard of anything of this kind before (for the farm was an old-fashioned one and had only the most primitive machinery), and they listened in astonishment while Snowball conjured up pictures of fantastic machines which would do their work for them while they grazed at their ease in the fields or improved their minds with reading and conversation.

Within a few weeks Snowball's plans for the windmill were fully worked out. The mechanical details came mostly from three books which had belonged to Mr. Jones—One Thousand Useful Things to Do About the House, Every Man His Own Bricklayer, and Electricity for Beginners. Snowball used as his study a shed which had once been used for **incubators** and had a smooth wooden floor, suitable for drawing on. He was **closeted** there for hours at a time. With his books held open by a stone, and with a piece of chalk gripped between the knuckles of his trotter, he would move rapidly to and fro, drawing in line after line and uttering little **whimpers** of excitement. Gradually the plans grew into a complicated mass of cranks and cog-wheels, covering more than half the floor, which the other animals found completely **unintelligible** but very impressive. All of them came to look at Snowball's drawings at least once a day. Even the hens and ducks came, and were at pains not to tread on the chalk marks. Only Napoleon held **aloof**. He had declared himself against the windmill from the start. One day, however, he arrived unexpectedly to examine the plans. He walked heavily round the shed, looked closely at every detail of the plans and snuffed at them once or twice, then stood for a little while contemplating them out of the corner of his eye; then suddenly he lifted his leg, urinated over the plans, and walked out without uttering a word.

> [incubator](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/incubator?q=incubators): a device for keeping birds' eggs at the correct temperature to allow young birds to develop until they break out of the shell
>
> [closeted](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/closeted): If someone is closeted somewhere, they stay there, often because they are working hard on something.
>
> [whimper](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/whimper?q=whimpers): (especially of an animal) to make a series of small, weak sounds expressing pain or unhappiness
>
> [unintelligible](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/unintelligible): not able to be understood
>
> [aloof](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/aloof): not friendly or willing to take part in things

 The whole farm was deeply divided on the subject of the windmill. Snowball did not deny that to build it would be a difficult business. Stone would have to be carried and built up into walls, then the sails would have to be made and after that there would be need for dynamos and cables. (How these were to be procured, Snowball did not say.) But he maintained that it could all be done in a year. And thereafter, he declared, so much labour would be saved that the animals would only need to work three days a week. Napoleon, on the other hand, argued that the great need of the moment was to increase food production, and that if they wasted time on the windmill they would all starve to death. The animals formed themselves into two factions under the slogans, "Vote for Snowball and the three-day week" and "Vote for Napoleon and the full **manger**." Benjamin was the only animal who did not side with either faction. He refused to believe either that food would become more plentiful or that the windmill would save work. Windmill or no windmill, he said, life would go on as it had always gone on—that is, badly.

> [manger](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/manger): an open box from which cattle and horses feed

 Apart from the disputes over the windmill, there was the question of the defense of the farm. It was fully realised that though the human beings had been defeated in the Battle of the Cowshed they might make another and more determined attempt to recapture the farm and **reinstate** Mr. Jones. They had all the more reason for doing so because the news of their defeat had spread across the countryside and made the animals on the neighbouring farms more **restive** than ever. As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to **procure** firearms and train themselves in the use of them. According to Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves. The animals listened first to Napoleon, then to Snowball, and could not make up their minds which was right; indeed, they always found themselves in agreement with the one who was speaking at the moment.

> [reinstate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/reinstate): to give someone back their previous job or position, or to cause something to exist again
>
> [restive](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/restive): unwilling to be controlled or be patient
>
> [procure](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/procure): to get something, especially after an effort

At last the day came when Snowball's plans were completed. At the Meeting on the following Sunday the question of whether or not to begin work on the windmill was to be put to the vote. When the animals had assembled in the big barn, Snowball stood up and, though occasionally interrupted by bleating from the sheep, set forth his reasons for **advocating** the building of the windmill. Then Napoleon stood up to reply. He said very quietly that the windmill was nonsense and that he advised nobody to vote for it, and promptly sat down again; he had spoken for barely thirty seconds, and seemed almost indifferent as to the effect he produced. At this Snowball sprang to his feet, and shouting down the sheep, who had begun bleating again, broke into a passionate appeal in favour of the windmill. Until now the animals had been about equally divided in their sympathies, but in a moment Snowball's **eloquence** had carried them away. In glowing sentences he painted a picture of Animal Farm as it might be when **sordid** labour was lifted from the animals' backs. His imagination had now run far beyond chaff-cutters and turnip-slicers. Electricity, he said, could operate threshing machines, ploughs, **harrows**, rollers, and reapers and binders, besides supplying every stall with its own electric light, hot and cold water, and an electric heater. By the time he had finished speaking, there was no doubt as to which way the vote would go. But just at this moment Napoleon stood up and, casting a peculiar sidelong look at Snowball, uttered a high-pitched whimper of a kind no one had ever heard him utter before.

> [advocate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/advocate?q=advocating): to publicly support or suggest an idea, development, or way of doing something
>
> [eloquence](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/eloquence): the quality of delivering a clear, strong message
>
> [sordid](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/sordid): dirty and unpleasant
>
> [harrow](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/harrow?q=harrows): a large piece of equipment that is pulled behind a tractor (= a farm vehicle) to break the earth into small pieces ready for planting

 At this there was a terrible **baying** sound outside, and nine enormous dogs wearing brass-studded collars came bounding into the barn. They dashed straight for Snowball, who only sprang from his place just in time to escape their snapping jaws. In a moment he was out of the door and they were after him. Too amazed and frightened to speak, all the animals crowded through the door to watch the chase. Snowball was racing across the long pasture that led to the road. He was running as only a pig can run, but the dogs were close on his heels. Suddenly he slipped and it seemed certain that they had him. Then he was up again, running faster than ever, then the dogs were gaining on him again. One of them all but closed his jaws on Snowball's tail, but Snowball whisked it free just in time. Then he put on an extra spurt and, with a few inches to spare, slipped through a hole in the hedge and was seen no more.

> [bay](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/bay?q=baying): (of dogs and wolves) to make a long, deep cry repeatedly

Silent and terrified, the animals **crept** back into the barn. In a moment the dogs came bounding back. At first no one had been able to imagine where these creatures came from, but the problem was soon solved: they were the puppies whom Napoleon had taken away from their mothers and reared privately. Though not yet full-grown, they were huge dogs, and as fierce-looking as wolves. They kept close to Napoleon. It was noticed that they wagged their tails to him in the same way as the other dogs had been used to do to Mr. Jones.

> [creep](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/creep): to move slowly, quietly, and carefully, usually in order to avoid being noticed

 Napoleon, with the dogs following him, now mounted on to the raised portion of the floor where Major had previously stood to deliver his speech. He announced that from now on the Sunday-morning Meetings would come to an end. They were unnecessary, he said, and wasted time. In future all questions relating to the working of the farm would be settled by a special committee of pigs, presided over by himself. These would meet in private and afterwards communicate their decisions to the others. The animals would still assemble on Sunday mornings to salute the flag, sing "Beasts of England," and receive their orders for the week; but there would be no more debates.

In spite of the shock that Snowball's **expulsion** had given them, the animals were **dismayed** by this announcement. Several of them would have protested if they could have found the right arguments. Even Boxer was vaguely troubled. He set his ears back, shook his forelock several times, and tried hard to **marshal** his thoughts; but in the end he could not think of anything to say. Some of the pigs themselves, however, were more **articulate**. Four young porkers in the front row uttered shrill squeals of disapproval, and all four of them sprang to their feet and began speaking at once. But suddenly the dogs sitting round Napoleon let out deep, menacing growls, and the pigs fell silent and sat down again. Then the sheep broke out into a tremendous bleating of "Four legs good, two legs bad!" which went on for nearly a quarter of an hour and put an end to any chance of discussion.

> [expulsion](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/expulsion): (the act of) forcing someone, or being forced, to leave a school, organization, or country
>
> [dismayed](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/dismayed): feeling unhappy and disappointed
>
> [marshal](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/marshal): to bring together or organize people or things in order to achieve a particular aim
>
> [articulate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/articulate): able to express thoughts and feelings easily and clearly, or showing this quality

Afterwards Squealer was sent round the farm to explain the new arrangement to the others.

"Comrades," he said, "I trust that every animal here appreciates the sacrifice that Comrade Napoleon has made in taking this extra labour upon himself. Do not imagine, comrades, that leadership is a pleasure! On the contrary, it is a deep and heavy responsibility. No one believes more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be? Suppose you had decided to follow Snowball, with his moonshine of windmills—Snowball, who, as we now know, was no better than a criminal?"

 "He fought bravely at the Battle of the Cowshed," said somebody.

"Bravery is not enough," said Squealer. "Loyalty and obedience are more important. And as to the Battle of the Cowshed, I believe the time will come when we shall find that Snowball's part in it was much exaggerated. Discipline, comrades, iron discipline! That is the watchword for today. One false step, and our enemies would be upon us. Surely, comrades, you do not want Jones back?"

Once again this argument was unanswerable. Certainly the animals did not want Jones back; if the holding of debates on Sunday mornings was liable to bring him back, then the debates must stop. Boxer, who had now had time to think things over, voiced the general feeling by saying: "If Comrade Napoleon says it, it must be right." And from then on he adopted the maxim, "Napoleon is always right," in addition to his private motto of "I will work harder."

By this time the weather had broken and the spring ploughing had begun. The shed where Snowball had drawn his plans of the windmill had been shut up and it was assumed that the plans had been rubbed off the floor. Every Sunday morning at ten o'clock the animals assembled in the big barn to receive their orders for the week. The skull of old Major, now clean of flesh, had been **disinterred** from the orchard and set up on a **stump** at the foot of the flagstaff, beside the gun. After the hoisting of the flag, the animals were required to file past the skull in a **reverent** manner before entering the barn. Nowadays they did not sit all together as they had done in the past. Napoleon, with Squealer and another pig named Minimus, who had a remarkable gift for composing songs and poems, sat on the front of the raised platform, with the nine young dogs forming a semicircle round them, and the other pigs sitting behind. The rest of the animals sat facing them in the main body of the barn. Napoleon read out the orders for the week in a **gruff** **soldierly** style, and after a single singing of "Beasts of England," all the animals dispersed.

> [disinter](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/disinter?q=disinterred): to dig up a dead body from the ground
>
> [stump](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/stump): the part of something such as a tree, tooth, arm, or leg that is left after most of it has been removed
>
> [reverent](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/reverent): showing great respect and admiration
>
> [gruff](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english-chinese-traditional/gruff): (of a person's voice) low and unfriendly, or (of a person's behaviour) unfriendly or showing no patience
>
> [soldierly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/soldierly): like a soldier

 On the third Sunday after Snowball's expulsion, the animals were somewhat surprised to hear Napoleon announce that the windmill was to be built after all. He did not give any reason for having changed his mind, but merely warned the animals that this extra task would mean very hard work; it might even be necessary to reduce their rations. The plans, however, had all been prepared, down to the last detail. A special committee of pigs had been at work upon them for the past three weeks. The building of the windmill, with various other improvements, was expected to take two years.

That evening Squealer explained privately to the other animals that Napoleon had never in reality been opposed to the windmill. On the contrary, it was he who had advocated it in the beginning, and the plan which Snowball had drawn on the floor of the incubator shed had actually been stolen from among Napoleon's papers. The windmill was, in fact, Napoleon's own creation. Why, then, asked somebody, had he spoken so strongly against it? Here Squealer looked very sly. That, he said, was Comrade Napoleon's cunning. He had seemed to oppose the windmill, simply as a manoeuvre to get rid of Snowball, who was a dangerous character and a bad influence. Now that Snowball was out of the way, the plan could go forward without his interference. This, said Squealer, was something called tactics. He repeated a number of times, "Tactics, comrades, tactics!" skipping round and whisking his tail with a merry laugh. The animals were not certain what the word meant, but Squealer spoke so persuasively, and the three dogs who happened to be with him growled so threateningly, that they accepted his explanation without further questions.