## Building a Blog Application

### Creating a Python virtual environment

If you upgrade a module version for an application, you might end up breaking other applications that require an older version of that module. To address this issue, you can use Python virtual environments. With virtual environments, you can install Python modules in an isolated location rather than installing them system-wide. Each virtual environment has its own Python binary and can have its own independent set of installed Python packages in its site-packages directory.

Since version 3.3, Python comes with the venv library, which provides support for creating lightweight virtual environments. By using the Python venv module to create isolated Python environments, you can use different package versions for different projects. Another advantage of using venv is that you won’t need any administrative privileges to install Python packages.

If you are using Linux or macOS, create an isolated environment with the following command:

```sh
python -m venv my_env
```

If you are using Linux or macOS, run the following command to activate your virtual environment:

```sh
source my_env/bin/activate
```

### Installing Django with pip

```sh
python -m pip install Django~=5.0.4
```

Now we will check whether Django has been successfully installed. Run the following command in a shell prompt:

```sh
python -m django --version
```

### Django overview

#### Main framework components

Django follows the **MTV (Model-Template-View)** pattern. It is a slightly similar pattern to the wellknown **MVC (Model-View-Controller)** pattern, where the template acts as the view and the framework itself acts as the controller.

The responsibilities in the Django MTV pattern are divided as follows: 

- **Model**: This defines the logical data structure and is the data handler between the database and the view.
- **Template**: This is the presentation layer. Django uses a plain-text template system that keeps everything that the browser renders.
- **View**: This communicates with the database via the model and transfers the data to the template for viewing.

The framework itself acts as the **controller**. It sends a request to the appropriate view, according to the Django URL configuration.

### Creating your first project

Django provides a command that allows you to create an initial project file structure.

```sh
django-admin startproject mysite
```

This will create a Django project with the name `mysite`.

```
mysite/   
	manage.py   
  mysite/     
  	__init__.py   
    asgi.py    
    settings.py  
    urls.py    
    wsgi.py
```

> `__init__.py`: An empty file that tells Python to treat the mysite directory as a Python module.
>
> `asgi.py`: This is the configuration to run your project as an ASGI application with ASGI-compatible web servers. ASGI is the emerging Python standard for asynchronous web servers and applications.
>
> `settings.py`: This indicates settings and configuration for your project and contains initial default settings.
>
> `urls.py`: This is the place where your URL patterns live. Each URL defined here is mapped to a view.
>
> `wsgi.py`: This is the configuration to run your project as a **Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI)** application with WSGI-compatible web servers.

#### Applying initial database migrations

To complete the project setup, you need to create the tables associated with the models of the default Django applications included in the `INSTALLED_APPS` setting. Django comes with a system that helps you manage database migrations.

```sh
cd mysite 
python manage.py migrate
```

The preceding lines are the database migrations that are applied by Django. By applying the initial migrations, the tables for the applications listed in the `INSTALLED_APPS` setting are created in the database.

#### Running the development server

```sh
python manage.py runserver
```

You can run the Django development server on a custom host and port or tell Django to load a specific settings file, as follows:

```sh
python manage.py runserver 127.0.0.1:8001 --settings=mysite.settings
```

#### Project settings

Let’s open the `settings.py` file and take a look at the configuration of the project. There are several settings that Django includes in this file, but these are only part of all the available Django settings.  You can see all the settings and their default values at https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/ref/settings/.

#### Creating an application

```sh
python manage.py startapp blog
```

This will create the basic structure of the application:

```
blog/    
	__init__.py   
  admin.py    
  apps.py    
  migrations/     
  	__init__.py   
  models.py   
  tests.py   
  views.py
```

### Creating the blog data models

#### Creating the Post model

```py
# blog/models.py

from django.db import models 

class Post(models.Model):  
  title = models.CharField(max_length=250)   
  slug = models.SlugField(max_length=250)  
  body = models.TextField()   
  
  def __str__(self):     
    return self.title
```

We have also added a `__str__()` method to the model class. This is the default Python method to return a string with the human-readable representation of the object. Django will use this method to display the name of the object in many places, such as the Django administration site.

By default, Django adds an auto-incrementing primary key field to each model. The field type for this field is specified in each application configuration or globally in the `DEFAULT_AUTO_FIELD` setting. When creating an application with the `startapp` command, the default value for `DEFAULT_AUTO_FIELD` is BigAutoField. This is a 64-bit integer that automatically increments according to available IDs. If you don’t specify a primary key for your model, Django adds this field automatically. You can also define one of the model fields to be the primary key by setting `primary_key=True` on it.

#### Adding datetime fields

```py
# blog/models.py

from django.db import models 
from django.utils import timezone  # New

class Post(models.Model):  
  title = models.CharField(max_length=250)   
  slug = models.SlugField(max_length=250)  
  body = models.TextField()   
  publish = models.DateTimeField(default=timezone.now)  # New
  
  def __str__(self):     
    return self.title
```

Another method to define default values for model fields is using database-computed default values. Introduced in Django 5, this feature allows you to use underlaying database functions to generate default values. For instance, the following code uses the database server’s current date and time as the default for the publish field:

```py
from django.db import models 
from django.db.models.functions import Now 

class Post(models.Model):    
  # ...
  publish = models.DateTimeField(db_default=Now())
```

To use database-generated default values, we use the db_default attribute instead of default. In this example, we use the `Now` database function. It serves a similar purpose to `default=timezone.now`, but instead of a Python-generated datetime, it uses the `NOW()` database function to produce the initial value.

You can read more about the db_default attribute at https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/ref/models/fields/#django.db.models.Field.db_default. You can find all available database functions at https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.0/ref/models/database-functions/.

```py
# blog/models.py

from django.db import models 
from django.utils import timezone

class Post(models.Model):  
  title = models.CharField(max_length=250)   
  slug = models.SlugField(max_length=250)  
  body = models.TextField()   
  publish = models.DateTimeField(default=timezone.now)
  created = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)  # New
  updated = models.DateTimeField(auto_now=True)  # New
  
  def __str__(self):     
    return self.title
```

By using `auto_now_add`, the date will be saved automatically when creating an object. By using `auto_now`, the date will be updated automatically when saving an object.

#### Defining a default sort order

```py
# blog/models.py

from django.db import models 
from django.utils import timezone

class Post(models.Model):  
  title = models.CharField(max_length=250)   
  slug = models.SlugField(max_length=250)  
  body = models.TextField()   
  publish = models.DateTimeField(default=timezone.now)
  created = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)
  updated = models.DateTimeField(auto_now=True)
  
  # New
  class Meta:     
    ordering = ['-publish']
  
  def __str__(self):     
    return self.title
```

We use the ordering attribute to tell Django that it should sort results by the `publish` field. This ordering will apply by default for database queries when no specific order is provided in the query. We indicate descending order by using a hyphen before the field name, `-publish`. Posts will be returned in reverse chronological order by default.

#### Adding a database index

```py
# blog/models.py

from django.db import models 
from django.utils import timezone

class Post(models.Model):  
  title = models.CharField(max_length=250)   
  slug = models.SlugField(max_length=250)  
  body = models.TextField()   
  publish = models.DateTimeField(default=timezone.now)
  created = models.DateTimeField(auto_now_add=True)
  updated = models.DateTimeField(auto_now=True)
  
  class Meta:     
    ordering = ['-publish']
    # New
    indexes = [     
      models.Index(fields=['-publish']),   
    ]
  
  def __str__(self):     
    return self.title
```

We use a **hyphen** before the field name to define the index specifically in descending order.

**Note**: **Index ordering** is not supported on MySQL. If you use MySQL for the database, a descending index will be created as a normal index.

#### Activating the application

