## Introduction to Cryptocurrency and Digital Asset Fraud and Crime

### Introduction to Cryptocurrency and Digital Assets

In general, cryptocurrencies can be defined as:

> Any form of currency that only exists digitally, that usually has no central issuing or regulating authority but instead uses a decentralized system to record transactions and manage the issuance of new units, and that relies on cryptography to prevent counterfeiting and fraudulent transactions.

### Introduction to Fraud

Fraud can be defined as:

> All multifarious means which human ingenuity can devise, and which are resorted to by one individual to get an advantage over another by false suggestions or suppression of the truth. It includes all surprises, tricks, cunning or dissembling, and any unfair way which another is cheated.

#### Understanding Fraud Approaches

There are a wide variety of traditional methods by which frauds are performed including:

1. Affinity fraud 
2. Advanced fee fraud 
3. High yield investment program fraud 
4. Web-based and social media fraud 
5. Pre-IPO scams 
6. Market manipulation including insider trading and pump-and-dump scams 
7. Ponzi schemes 
8. Financial statement fraud 
9. Embezzlement 
10. Asset misappropriation 
11. Charity and disaster fraud 
12. Romance fraud 
13. Credit Card fraud 
14. Email fraud 
15. Elder fraud 
16. Election fraud 
17. Funeral and cemetery fraud 
18. Health care fraud 
19. Identity theft 
20. Bank fraud 
21. Gambling fraud 
22. Letter of credit fraud 
23. Nigerian Letter or 419 Fraud 
24. Prime bank note fraud 
25. Pyramid schemes 
26. Bribery and corruption 
27. Payroll fraud 
28. Tax fraud 
29. Invoice and vendor fraud 
30. Counterfeiting, forgery and money fraud 
31. Asset return fraud 
32. Insurance fraud 
33. Sextortion 
34. Fraud against the elderly including nursing home fraud 
35. Skimming including ATM and Point of sale (POS) data theft 
36. Telemarketing fraud 
37. Racketeering 
38. Redemption/strawman/bond fraud 
39. Real estate fraud including mortgage fraud and reverse mortgage fraud 
40. Contract fraud 
41. Wire fraud

#### Understanding the Elements of Fraud

From a legal perspective under common law in general, in order to prove a fraud there are three primary elements. The first involves a materially false statement. This is also referred to as a misrepresentation of a material fact. This also relates to another legal concept known as fraudulent inducement, where someone is tricked into entering into a specific transaction based on misrepresentations. 

The second element is that the false statement was made with the intent to trick or deceive a victim. In a legal context this intent to do harm is known as scienter. It should be noted that if there was no intent to make a materially false statement, but the statements were made with negligence (i.e. the speaker lacked reasonable grounds for their statement) then scienter could also potentially be achieved. The specifics as to the degree of negligence required to meet different legal tests are often determined on a case-by-case basis by different courts. 

The third element of fraud from a legal perspective is that a victim relied on the false statements. It is important to note that for a fraud to occur it does not necessary mean that the victim suffered a direct pecuniary loss, be it in fiat, crypto, or something else of value, but may also have suffered noneconomic losses, or they may have been put in a position to have potentially suffered a loss in the future which they otherwise would have likely avoided if not for the fraud.

### Motivations for Fraud

When fraudulent activity resulting in theft is undertaken by employees against their employer this is known as occupational fraud . There is a popular occupational fraud model that attempts to explain the motivations for individuals that perpetrate this type of fraud known as Cressey’s fraud triangle. According to this model the three elements that lead to occupational fraud are: 

1. Perceived financial need that cannot be shared with others 
2. Perceived opportunity 
3. Rationalization.

### Comparing Crypto Fraud with Traditional Fraud

Commonly cryptocurrency and digital asset fraud can be bifurcated into two broad categories. The first are those frauds that involve the payment or transfer of cryptocurrency. These can also be referred to as transfer scams. These may also be referred to as facilitation schemes, because they are facilitating the payment of cryptocurrency or digital assets to criminals. An example of a fraud in this category would be a ransomware scam. 

The second category of cryptocurrency fraud involves frauds resulting in the direct theft of cryptocurrency or digital assets. This could be as simple as a hack of an individual digital wallet that results in the outright theft of crypto assets. Other more complex direct scams include a variation on traditional romance scams. These can also be referred to as direct theft scams. Examples of these direct those scams include:

- Exchange hacks 
- Wallet hacks 
- SIM swap fraud 
- Phishing scams 
- Romance scams 
- Giveaway/Multiplier scams.

### Crypto Fraud Statistics

A rug pull is a type of scam where criminal developers create a seemingly legitimate project and then trick investors to invest in the projects, often through the purchase of tokens associated with the project. Rather than used the raised funds to build out the project as promised, the criminals simply abandon the project and run away with the stolen funds. This effectively pulls the rug out from under the victims who are left holding worthless digital assets and tokens on a now abandoned project.

### Crypto Romance Scams

A romance scam is one that involves a fraudulent romantic relationship where one person tricks another person into giving them items of value or even outright theft facilitated through the fraudulent relationship.

Crypto romance scams often begin with the use of online dating platforms or apps to start long-distance relationships with people. The conversation then turns to cryptocurrency investment opportunities related to a scam.

#### Pig Butchering Scams

A variation of a traditional romance scams that is increasingly finding victims in cryptocurrency-related scams are so-called pig butchering scams.

### Crypto Phishing Scams

In another type of crypto phishing scam, known as wallet phishing, fraudsters ask victims to provide their private wallet keys. Once they have these keys, the fraudsters then use this information to empty the wallets and steal all the victim’s cryptocurrency.

### Giveaway/Multiplier Scams

#### Celebrity and Corporate Impersonation

#### Social Media Hijacking

#### Goodwill Airdrop Fraud

